|  | Diluted EPS Using If-Converted <br> Basic EPS Method |  |  |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| Denominator | 500,000 | 560,000 |  |
| EPS | USD3.10 | USD3.13 | $\leftarrow$ Exceeds basic EPS; security is antidilutive and, therefore, not included. Reported diluted EPS= USD3.10. |

## Changes in EPS

Having explained the calculations of both basic and diluted EPS, we return to an examination of changes in EPS. As noted in Exhibit 12, AB InBev's fully diluted EPS from continuing operations increased from USD0.68 in 2016 to USD3.96 in 2017. In general, an increase in EPS results from an increase in net income, a decrease in the number of shares outstanding, or a combination of both. In the notes to its financial statements (not shown), AB InBev discloses that the weighted average number of shares for both the basic and fully diluted calculations was greater in 2017 than in 2016. Thus, for AB InBev, the improvement in EPS from 2016 to 2017 was driven by an increase in net income. Changes in the numerator and denominator explain the changes in EPS arithmetically. To understand the business drivers of those changes requires further research. Lesson 5 presents analytical tools that an analyst can use to highlight areas for further examination.

## INCOME STATEMENT RATIOS AND COMMON-SIZE ANALYSIS

evaluate a company's financial performance using common-size income statements and financial ratios based on the income statement

In this lesson, we apply two analytical tools to analyze the income statement: common-size analysis and income statement ratios. The objective of this analysis is to assess over a period of time a company's performance relative to its own past performance or to that of another company.

## Common-Size Analysis of the Income Statement

Common-size analysis of the income statement can be performed by stating each line item on the income statement as a percentage of revenue. Common-size statements facilitate comparison across time periods (time series analysis) and across companies (cross-sectional analysis) because the standardization of each line item removes the effect of size.

To illustrate, Panel A of Exhibit 18 presents an income statement for three hypothetical companies in the same industry. Company A and Company B, each with USD10 million in sales, are larger (as measured by sales) than Company C, which has only USD2 million in sales. In addition, Companies A and B both have higher operating profit: USD2 million and USD1.5 million, respectively, compared with Company C's operating profit of only USD400,000.

How can an analyst meaningfully compare the performance of these companies? By preparing a common-size income statement, as illustrated in Panel B, an analyst can readily see that the percentages of Company C's expenses and profit relative to its sales are exactly the same as for Company A. Furthermore, although Company C's operating profit is lower than Company B's in absolute dollars, it is higher in percentage terms ( 20 percent for Company C compared with only 15 percent for Company B). For each USD100 of sales, Company C generates USD5 more operating profit than Company B. In other words, Company C is relatively more profitable than Company $B$ based on this measure.

The common-size income statement also highlights differences in companies' strategies. Comparing the two larger companies, Company A reports significantly higher gross profit as a percentage of sales than does Company B ( 70 percent compared with 25 percent). Given that both companies operate in the same industry, why can Company A generate so much higher gross profit? One possible explanation is found by comparing the operating expenses of the two companies. Company A spends significantly more on research and development and on advertising than Company B. Expenditures on research and development likely result in products with superior technology. Expenditures on advertising likely result in greater brand awareness. So, based on these differences, it is likely that Company A is selling technologically superior products with a better brand image. Company B may be selling its products more cheaply (with a lower gross profit as a percentage of sales) but is saving money by not investing in research and development or advertising. In practice, differences across companies are more subtle, but the concept is similar. An analyst, noting significant differences, would do more research and seek to understand the underlying reasons for the differences and their implications for the future performance of the companies.

## Exhibit 18: income Statement for Three Hypothetical Companies

Panel A: Income Statements for Companies A, B, and C (US dollars)

|  | A | B | C |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| Sales | USD10,000,000 | USD10,000,000 | USD2,000,000 |
| Cost of sales | 3,000,000 | 7,500,000 | 600,000 |
| Gross profit | 7,000,000 | 2,500,000 | 1,400,000 |
| Selling, general, and administrative expenses | 1,000,000 | 1,000,000 | 200,000 |
| Research and development | 2,000,000 | - | 400,000 |


| Panel A: Income Statements for Companies A, B, and C (US dollars) |  |  |  |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
|  | A | B | C |
| Advertising | 2,000,000 | - | 400,000 |
| Operating profit | 2,000,000 | 1,500,000 | 400,000 |
| Panel B: Common-Size Income Statements for Companies A, B, and C (\%) |  |  |  |
|  | A | B | C |
| Sales | 100\% | 100\% | 100\% |
| Cost of sales | 30 | 75 | 30 |
| Gross profit | 70 | 25 | 70 |
| Selling, general, and administrative expenses | 10 | 10 | 10 |
| Research and development | 20 | 0 | 20 |
| Advertising | 20 | 0 | 20 |
| Operating profit | 20 | 15 | 20 |

Note: Each line item is expressed as a percentage of the company's sales.
For most expenses, comparison to the amount of sales is appropriate. In the case of taxes, however, it is more meaningful to compare the amount of taxes with the amount of pretax income. Using note disclosure, an analyst can then examine the causes for differences in effective tax rates. To project the companies' future net income, an analyst would project the companies' pretax income and apply an estimated effective tax rate determined in part by the historical tax rates.

Vertical common-size analysis of the income statement is particularly useful in cross-sectional analysis-comparing companies with each other for a particular time period or comparing a company with industry or sector data. The analyst could select individual peer companies for comparison, use industry data from published sources, or compile data from databases based on a selection of peer companies or broader industry data. For example, Exhibit 19 presents median common-size income statement data compiled for the components of the S\&P 500 classified into the 10 S\&P/ MSCI Global Industrial Classification System (GICS) sectors using 2017 data. Note that when compiling aggregate data such as this, some level of aggregation is necessary and less detail may be available than from peer company financial statements. The performance of an individual company can be compared with industry or peer company data to evaluate its relative performance.

Exhibit 19: Median Common-Size Income Statement Statistics for the S\&P 500 Classified by S\&P/MSCI GICS Sector Data for 2017

|  | Energy | Materials | Industrials | Consumer Discretionary | Consumer Staples | Health Care |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| Number of observations | 34 | 27 | 69 | 81 | 34 | 59 |
| Gross Margin | 37.7\% | 33.0\% | 36.8\% | 37.6\% | 43.4\% | 59.0\% |


|  | Energy |  | Materials | Industrials | Consumer Discretionary | Consumer Staples | Health Care |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| Operating Margin | 6.4\% |  | 14.9\% | 13.5\% | 11.0\% | 17.2\% | 17.4\% |
| Net Profit Margin | 4.9\% |  | 9.9\% | 8.8\% | 6.0\% | 10.9\% | 7.2\% |
|  | Financials |  |  | Information Technology | Telecom-munication Services | Utilities | Real Estate |
| Number of observations | 63 |  |  | 64 | 4 | 29 | 29 |
| Gross Margin | 40.5\% |  |  | 62.4\% | 56.4\% | 34.3\% | 39.8\% |
| Operating Margin | 36.5\% |  |  | 21.1\% | 15.4\% | 21.7\% | 30.1\% |
| Net Profit Margin | 18.5\% |  |  | 11.3\% | 13.1\% | 10.1\% | 21.3\% |

Source: Based on data from Compustat. Operating margin based on EBIT (earnings before interest and taxes).

## Income Statement Ratios

One aspect of financial performance is profitability. One indicator of profitability is net profit margin, also known as profit margin and return on sales, which is calculated as net income divided by revenue (or sales):

$$
\text { Net profit margin }=\frac{\text { Net income }}{\text { Revenue }} \text {. }
$$

Net profit margin measures the amount of income that a company was able to generate for each dollar of revenue. A higher level of net profit margin indicates higher profitability and is thus more desirable. Net profit margin can also be found directly on the common-size income statements.

For AB InBev, net profit margin based on continuing operations for 2017 was 16.2 percent (calculated as profit from continuing operations of USD9,155 million, divided by revenue of USD56,444 million). To judge this ratio, some comparison is needed. AB InBev's profitability can be compared with that of another company or with its own previous performance. Compared with previous years, AB InBev's profitability is higher than in 2016 but lower than 2015. In 2016, net profit margin based on continuing operations was 6.0 percent, and in 2015, it was 22.9 percent.

Another measure of profitability is the gross profit margin. Gross profit (gross margin) is calculated as revenue minus cost of goods sold, and the gross profit margin is calculated as the gross profit divided by revenue:

$$
\text { Gross profit margin }=\frac{\text { Gross profit }}{\text { Revenue }} .
$$

The gross profit margin measures the amount of gross profit that a company has generated for each dollar of revenue. A higher level of gross profit margin indicates higher profitability and thus is generally more desirable, although differences in gross profit margins across companies reflect differences in companies' strategies. For example, consider a company pursuing a strategy of selling a differentiated product (e.g., a product differentiated based on brand name, quality, superior technology, or patent protection). The company would likely be able to sell the differentiated product at a higher price than a similar, but undifferentiated, product and, therefore, would likely show a higher gross profit margin than a company selling an undifferentiated product. Although a company selling a differentiated product would likely show a higher gross
profit margin, this may take time. In the initial stage of the strategy, the company would likely incur costs to create a differentiated product, such as advertising or research and development, which would not be reflected in the gross margin calculation.

AB InBev's gross profit was USD35,058 million in 2017, USD27,715 million in 2016, and USD26,467 million in 2015. Expressing gross profit as a percentage of revenues, we see that the gross profit margin was 62.1 percent in 2017, 60.9 percent in 2016, and 60.7 percent in 2015. In absolute terms, AB InBev's gross profit was higher in 2016 than in 2015. However, AB InBev's gross profit margin was approximately constant between 2015 and 2016.

Exhibit 20 presents a common-size income statement for AB InBev and highlights certain profitability ratios. The net profit margin and gross profit margin described previously are just two of the many subtotals that can be generated from common-size income statements. Other "margins" used by analysts include the operating profit margin (profit from operations divided by revenue) and the pretax margin (profit before tax divided by revenue).

Exhibit 20: AB InBev's Margins: Abbreviated Common-Size Income Statement

|  | 12 Months Ended 31 December |  |  |  |  |  |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
|  | 2017 |  | 2016 |  | 2015 |  |
|  | US dollars | \% | US dollars | \% | US dollars | \% |
| Revenue | 56,444 | 100.0 | 45,517 | 100.0 | 43,604 | 100.0 |
| Cost of sales | $(21,386)$ | (37.9) | $(17,803)$ | (39.1) | $(17,137)$ | (39.3) |
| Gross profit | 35,058 | 62.1 | 27,715 | 60.9 | 26,467 | 60.7 |
| Distribution expenses | $(5,876)$ | (10.4) | $(4,543)$ | (10.0) | $(4,259)$ | (9.8) |
| Sales and marketing expenses | $(8,382)$ | (14.9) | $(7,745)$ | (17.0) | $(6,913)$ | (15.9) |
| Administrative expenses | $(3,841)$ | (6.8) | $(2,883)$ | (6.3) | $(2,560)$ | (5.9) |
| Portions omitted |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| Profit from operations | 17,152 | 30.4 | 12,882 | 28.3 | 13,904 | 31.9 |
| Finance cost | $(6,885)$ | (12.2) | $(9,382)$ | (20.6) | $(3,142)$ | (7.2) |
| Finance income | 378 | 0.7 | 818 | 1.8 | 1,689 | 3.9 |
| Net finance income/(cost) | $(6,507)$ | (11.5) | $(8,564)$ | (18.8) | $(1,453)$ | (3.3) |
| Share of result of associates and joint ventures | 430 | 0.8 | 16 | 0.0 | 10 | 0.0 |
| Profit before tax | 11,076 | 19.6 | 4,334 | 9.5 | 12,461 | 28.6 |
| Income tax expense | $(1,920)$ | (3.4) | $(1,613)$ | (3.5) | $(2,594)$ | (5.9) |
| Profit from continuing operations | 9,155 | 16.2 | 2,721 | 6.0 | 9,867 | 22.6 |
| Profit from discontinued operations | 28 | 0.0 | 48 | 0.1 | - | - |
| Profit of the year | 9,183 | 16.3 | 2,769 | 6.1 | 9,867 | 22.6 |

Note: reported total amounts may have slight discrepancies due to rounding
The profitability ratios and the common-size income statement yield quick insights about changes in a company's performance. For example, AB InBev's decrease in profitability in 2016 was not driven by a decrease in gross profit margin. Gross profit margin in 2016 was actually slightly higher than in 2015. The company's decrease in profitability in 2016 was driven in part by higher operating expenses and, in particular, by a significant increase in finance costs. The increased finance costs resulted from the 2016 merger with SABMiller. Valued at more than USD100 billion, the acquisition
was one of the largest in history. The combination of AB InBev and SABMiller also explains the increase in revenue from around USD45 billion to over USD56 billion. The profitability ratios and the common-size income statement thus highlight areas about which an analyst might wish to gain further understanding.

