1. What are the major sources and uses of cash for Groupe Danone?

## Solution:

The major categories of cash flows can be summarized as follows (in EUR millions):

|  | 2016 | 2017 |
| :--- | :--- | :--- |
| Cash flows provided by operating activities | 2,652 | 2,958 |
| Cash flows provided by (used in) investing activities | (848) | $(11,437)$ |
| Cash flows provided by (used in) financing activities | $(1,616)$ | 8,289 |
| Exchange rate effects on cash | (151) | 272 |
| Increase in cash | 38 | 81 |

The primary source of cash for Groupe Danone in 2016 was operating activities of 2,652 . During that year, the company spent 925 on capital expenditures, representing most of the outflow of 848 from investing activities. In 2017, however, the primary source of cash for Groupe Danone was from financing activities. The investing section shows significant use of cash in 2017 for purchase of subsidiaries within investing activities.
2. Is cash flow from operating activities sufficient to cover capital expenditures?

## Solution:

Yes, in both 2016 and 2017, there was sufficient operating cash flow to cover usual capital expenditures.
3. What is the relationship between net income and cash flow from operating activities?

## Solution:

In both years, operating cash flow exceeded net income. The fact that operating cash flow exceeds net income in both years is a positive sign.
4. What types of financing cash flows does Groupe Danone have?

## Solution:

Footnotes disclose a major acquisition with an aggregate value of USD12.5 billion, some of which was funded through proceeds from an earlier bond issuance, which appears as a financing cash flow in the financing section for 2016.

## RATIOS AND COMMON-SIZE ANALYSIS

calculate and interpret free cash flow to the firm, free cash flow to equity, and performance and coverage cash flow ratios

In common-size analysis of a company's income statement, each income and expense line item is expressed as a percentage of net revenues (net sales). For the common-size balance sheet, each asset, liability, and equity line item is expressed as a percentage
of total assets. The common-size cash flow statement has two alternative approaches. The first approach is to express each line item of cash inflow (outflow) as a percentage of total inflows (outflows) of cash, and the second approach is to express each line item as a percentage of net revenue. The common-size format makes it easier to see trends in cash flow rather than just looking at the total amount.

Consider the statement of cash flows for Acme Corporation in Exhibit 3. Exhibit 4 demonstrates the total cash inflows/total cash outflows common-size method for Acme Corporation. Under this approach, each of the cash inflows is expressed as a percentage of the total cash inflows, whereas each of the cash outflows is expressed as a percentage of the total cash outflows. In Panel A, Acme's common-size statement is based on a cash flow statement using the direct method of presenting operating cash flows. Operating cash inflows and outflows are separately presented on the cash flow statement, and therefore, the common-size cash flow statement shows each of these operating inflows (outflows) as a percentage of total inflows (outflows).

In Panel B of Exhibit 4, Acme's common-size statement is based on a cash flow statement using the indirect method of presenting operating cash flows. When a cash flow statement has been presented using the indirect method, operating cash inflows and outflows are not separately presented; therefore, the common-size cash flow statement shows only the net operating cash flow (net cash provided by or used in operating activities) as a percentage of total inflows or outflows, depending on whether the net amount was a cash inflow or outflow. Because Acme's net operating cash flow is positive, it is shown as a percentage of total inflows.

## Exhibit 3: Acme Corporation Cash Flow Statement (Direct Method) for Year Ended 31 December 2018

Cash flow from operating activities:

| Cash received from customers | $\$ 23,543$ |
| :--- | :---: |
| Cash paid to suppliers | $(11,900)$ |
| Cash paid to employees | $(4,113)$ |
| Cash paid for other operating expenses | $(3,532)$ |
| Cash paid for interest | $(258)$ |
| Cash paid for income tax | $(1,134)$ |
| Net cash provided by operating activities | 2,606 |

Cash flow from investing activities:

| Cash received from sale of equipment | 762 |
| :---: | :---: |
| Cash paid for purchase of equipment | $(1,300)$ |
| Net cash used for investing activities | $(538)$ |


| Cash flow from financing activities: |  |
| :--- | :--- |
| Cash paid to retire long-term debt | (500) |
| Cash paid to retire common stock | (600) |
| Cash paid for dividends | $(1,120)$ |
| Net cash used for financing activities | $(2,120)$ |
| Net increase (decrease) in cash | (152) |
| Cash balance, 31 December 2017 | 1,163 |
| Cash balance, 31 December 2018 | 1,011 |

Exhibit 4: Acme Corporation Common-Size Cash Flow Statement: Percentage of Inflows/Outflows Approach

| Panel A. Direct Format for Cash Flow |  |  |
| :--- | :--- | :--- |
| Inflows |  | Percentage of Total Inflows |
| Receipts from customers | USD23,543 | 96.86\% |
| Sale of equipment | 762 | 3.14 |
| Total | USD24,305 | 100.00\% |


| Outflows |  | Percentage of Total Outflows |
| :--- | :--- | :--- |
| Payments to suppliers | USD11,900 | 48.66\% |
| Payments to employees | 4,113 | 16.82 |
| Payments for other operating expenses | 3,532 | 14.44 |
| Payments for interest | 258 | 1.05 |
| Payments for income tax | 1,134 | 4.64 |
| Purchase of equipment | 1,300 | 5.32 |
| Retirement of long-term debt | 500 | 2.04 |
| Retirement of common stock | 600 | 2.45 |
| Dividend payments | 1,120 | 4.58 |
| Total | USD24,457 | 100.00\% |
| Net increase (decrease) in cash | (USD152) |  |

Panel B. Indirect Format for Cash Flow

| Inflows |  | Percentage of Total <br> Inflows |
| :--- | :---: | :---: |
| Net cash provided by operating activities | $\mathrm{USD} 2,606$ |  |
| Sale of equipment | 762 |  |
| Total | $\mathrm{USD} 3,368$ |  |
|  |  |  |


| Outflows |  | Percentage of Total Outflows |
| :--- | :--- | :--- |
| Purchase of equipment | USD1,300 | 36.93\% |
| Retirement of long-term debt | 500 | 14.20 |
| Retirement of common stock | 600 | 17.05 |
| Dividend payments | 1,120 | 31.82 |
| Total | USD3,520 | 100.00\% |
| Net increase (decrease) in cash | (USD152) |  |

Exhibit 5 demonstrates the second method of common-sizing the statement of cash flows: the net revenue approach. Under the net revenue approach, each line item in the cash flow statement is shown as a percentage of net revenue. The common-size
statement in Exhibit 5 has been developed based on Acme's cash flow statement using the indirect method for operating cash flows and using net revenue (cash received from customers) for the company in 2018 of USD23,598 from Exhibit 3.

This method is also useful to the analyst in forecasting future cash flows because individual items in the common-size statement (e.g., depreciation, fixed capital expenditures, debt borrowing, and repayment) are expressed as a percentage of net revenue. Thus, once the analyst has forecasted revenue, the common-size statement provides a basis for forecasting cash flows for those items with an expected relation to net revenue.

Exhibit 5: Acme Corporation Common-Size Cash Flow Statement: Net Revenue Approach

|  |  | Percentage of Net Revenue |
| :--- | :--- | :--- |
| Cash flow from operating activities: |  |  |
| Net income | USD2,210 | 9.37\% |
| Depreciation expense | 1,052 | 4.46 |
| Gain on sale of equipment | (205) | (0.87) |
| Increase in accounts receivable | (55) | (0.23) |
| Increase in inventory | (707) | (3.00) |
| Decrease in prepaid expenses | 23 | 0.10 |
| Increase in accounts payable | 263 | 1.11 |
| Increase in salary and wage payable | 10 | 0.04 |
| Decrease in interest payable | (12) | (0.05) |
| Increase in income tax payable | 5 | 0.02 |
| Increase in other accrued liabilities | 22 | 0.09 |
| Net cash provided by operating activities | USD2,606 | 11.04\% |
| Cash flow from investing activities: |  |  |
| Cash received from sale of equipment | USD762 | 3.23\% |
| Cash paid for purchase of equipment | $(1,300)$ | (5.51) |
| Net cash used for investing activities | USD(538) | (2.28)\% |
| Cash flow from financing activities: |  |  |
| Cash paid to retire long-term debt | USD(500) | (2.12)\% |
| Cash paid to retire common stock | (600) | (2.54) |
| Cash paid for dividends | $(1,120)$ | (4.75) |
| Net cash used for financing activities | USD(2,220) | (9.41)\% |
| Net decrease in cash | USD(152) | (0.64)\% |

## EXAMPLE 2

## Analysis of a Common-Size Cash Flow Statement

1. Andrew Potter is examining an abbreviated common-size cash flow statement for Apple Inc., a multinational technology company. The common-size cash flow statement, presented in Exhibit 6, was prepared by dividing each line item by total net sales for the same year.

## Exhibit 6: Apple Inc. Common-Size Statements of Cash Flows as Percentage of Total Net Sales

|  | 12 Months Ended |  |  |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
|  | 30 September 2017 | 24 September 2016 | 26 September 2015 |
| Statement of Cash Flows [Abstract] |  |  |  |
| Operating activities: |  |  |  |
| Net income | 21.1\% | 21.2\% | 22.8\% |
| Adjustments to reconcile net income to cash generated by operating activities: |  |  |  |
| Depreciation and amortization | 4.4\% | 4.9\% | 4.8\% |
| Share-based compensation expense | 2.1\% | 2.0\% | 1.5\% |
| Deferred income tax expense | 2.6\% | 2.3\% | 0.6\% |
| Other | -0.1\% | 0.2\% | 0.2\% |
| Changes in operating assets and liabilities: |  |  |  |
| Accounts receivable, net | -0.9\% | 0.2\% | 0.2\% |
| Inventories | -1.2\% | 0.1\% | -0.1\% |
| Vendor non-trade receivables | -1.9\% | 0.0\% | -1.6\% |
| Other current and non-current assets | -2.3\% | 0.5\% | -0.1\% |
| Accounts payable | 4.2\% | 0.9\% | 2.1\% |
| Deferred revenue | -0.3\% | -0.7\% | 0.4\% |
| Other current and non-current liabilities | -0.1\% | -0.9\% | 3.9\% |
| Cash generated by operating activities | 27.7\% | 30.5\% | 34.8\% |
| Investing activities: |  |  |  |
| Purchases of marketable securities | -69.6\% | -66.0\% | -71.2\% |
| Proceeds from maturities of marketable securities | 13.9\% | 9.9\% | 6.2\% |
| Proceeds from sales of marketable securities | 41.3\% | 42.0\% | 46.0\% |
| Payments made in connection with business acquisitions, net | -0.1\% | -0.1\% | -0.1\% |


|  | 12 Months Ended |  |  |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
|  | 30 September 2017 | 24 September 2016 | 26 September 2015 |
| Payments for acquisition of property, plant and equipment | -5.4\% | -5.9\% | -4.8\% |
| Payments for acquisition of intangible assets | -0.2\% | -0.4\% | -0.1\% |
| Payments for strategic investments, net | -0.2\% | -0.6\% | 0.0\% |
| Other | 0.1\% | -0.1\% | 0.0\% |
| Cash used in investing activities | -20.3\% | -21.3\% | -24.1\% |

Financing activities:

| Proceeds from issuance of common stock | 0.2\% | 0.2\% | 0.2\% |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| Excess tax benefits from equity awards | 0.3\% | 0.2\% | 0.3\% |
| Payments for taxes related to net share settlement of equity awards | -0.8\% | -0.7\% | -0.6\% |
| Payments for dividends and dividend equivalents | -5.6\% | -5.6\% | -4.9\% |
| Repurchases of common stock | -14.4\% | -13.8\% | -15.1\% |
| Proceeds from issuance of term debt, net | 12.5\% | 11.6\% | - |
| Repayments of term debt | -1.5\% | -1.2\% | 0.0\% |
| Change in commercial paper, net | 1.7\% | -0.2\% | 0.9\% |
| Cash used in financing activities | -7.6\% | -9.5\% | -7.6\% |
| Increase/(Decrease) in cash and cash equivalents | -0.1\% | -0.3\% | 3.1\% |

2. Based on the information in Exhibit 6, discuss the trends in Apple's:
A. depreciation and amortization expense.
B. capital expenditures.

## Solution:

A. Apple's depreciation and amortization expense was consistently just less than 5 percent of total net revenue in 2015 and 2016, declining to 4.4 percent in 2017.
B. Apple's level of capital expenditures is greater than its depreciation and amortization in 2016 and 2017, whereas it was at about the same level as depreciation and amortization in 2015. In 2017, capital expenditures approached 6 percent. This is an indication that Apple is doing
more than replacing property, plant, and equipment, and is expanding those investments. With cash generated from operating activities exceeding 27 percent of sales in every year, however, Apple has more than enough cash flow from operations to fund these expenditures.
3. Compare Apple's operating cash flow as a percentage of revenue with Apple's net profit margin.

## Solution:

Apple's operating cash flow as a percentage of sales is much higher than net profit margin in every year. This gap appears to be declining however over the three-year period. In 2015 net profit margin was 22.8 percent, while operating cash flow as a percentage of sales was 34.8 percent. By 2017, the net profit margin declined slightly to 21.1 percent, while the operating cash flow as a percentage of sales declined more to 27.7 percent. The primary difference appears to have been an increase in the level of receivables and inventory purchases, somewhat offset by an increase in accounts payable.
4. Discuss Apple's use of its positive operating cash flow.

## Solution:

Apple generated a large amount of operating cash flow each year, exceeding net income. This cash flow is used for relatively modest purchases of property, plant, and equipment, substantial purchases of marketable securities (investments), dividend payments and repurchases of its own stock.

## FREE CASH FLOW MEASURES

calculate and interpret free cash flow to the firm, free cash flow to equity, and performance and coverage cash flow ratios

As noted earlier, it is desirable that operating cash flows are sufficient to cover capital expenditures. The excess of operating cash flow over capital expenditures is known generically as free cash flow. For purposes of valuing a company or its equity securities, an analyst may want to determine and use other cash flow measures, such as free cash flow to the firm (FCFF) or free cash flow to equity (FCFE).

FCFF is the cash flow available to both debt and equity investors after all operating expenses (including income taxes) have been paid and necessary investments in working capital and fixed capital have been made. FCFF can be computed starting with net income as follows:

$$
\mathrm{FCFF}=\mathrm{NI}+\mathrm{NCC}+\operatorname{Int}(1-\operatorname{Tax} \text { rate })-\mathrm{FCInv}-\mathrm{WCInv}
$$

where:
NI $=$ Net income,
NCC $=$ Non-cash charges (such as depreciation and amortization),
Int $=$ Interest expense,
FCInv $=$ Capital expenditures (fixed capital, such as equipment), and
WCInv $=$ Working capital expenditures.
The reason for adding back interest is that FCFF is the cash flow available to the suppliers of debt capital as well as equity capital. Conveniently, FCFF can also be computed from cash flow from operating activities as follows

FCFF $=$ CFO $+\operatorname{Int}(1-\operatorname{Tax}$ rate $)-\operatorname{FCInv}$.
CFO represents cash flow from operating activities under US GAAP or under IFRS, where the company has included interest paid in operating activities. If interest paid was included in financing activities, then CFO does not have to be adjusted for Int(1 - Tax rate). Under IFRS, if the company has placed interest and dividends received in investing activities, these should be added back to CFO to determine FCFF. Additionally, if dividends paid were subtracted in the operating section, these should be added back in to compute FCFF.

Assuming a marginal tax rate of 34 percent for Acme in 2018, the computation of FCFF for Acme Corporation (based on the data from Exhibit 3) is shown in Exhibit 7.

Exhibit 7: FCFF for Acme Corporation

| CFO | USD2,606 |
| :--- | :--- |
| Plus: Interest paid times (1 - income tax rate) |  |
| \{USD258 [1-0.34] ${ }^{\text {a }}$ \} | 170 |
| Less: Net investments in fixed capital (USD1,300 - USD762) | (538) |
| FCFF | USD2,238 |
| tax rate of 0.34 $=($ Tax expense $\div$ Pretax income $)=(\$ 1,139 \div \$ 3,349)$. |  |

FCFE is the cash flow available to the company's common stockholders after all operating expenses and borrowing costs (principal and interest) have been paid and necessary investments in working capital and fixed capital have been made. FCFE can be computed as follows:

FCFE $=$ CFO - FCInv + Net borrowing.
When net borrowing is negative, debt repayments exceed receipts of borrowed funds. In this case, FCFE can be expressed as follows:

FCFE $=$ CFO - FCInv - Net debt repayment.
The computation of FCFE for Acme Corporation (again, based on the data from Exhibit 3) is shown in Exhibit 8.

Exhibit 8: FCFE for Acme Corporation

| CFO | USD2,606 |
| :--- | :---: |
| Less: Net investments in fixed capital (USD1,300 | $(538)$ |
| - USD762) |  |
| Less: Debt repayment | $\frac{(500)}{\text { FCFE }}$ |

Positive FCFE means that the company has an excess of operating cash flow over amounts needed for capital expenditures and repayment of debt. This cash would be available for distribution to owners.

## 5 CASH FLOW STATEMENT ANALYSIS: CASH FLOW RATIOS

calculate and interpret free cash flow to the firm, free cash flow to equity, and performance and coverage cash flow ratios

Ratios based on information in statements of cash flows can be used to compare the performance and prospects of different companies in an industry and of different industries. These ratios generally fall into cash flow performance (profitability) ratios and cash flow coverage (solvency) ratios. Exhibit 9 summarizes the calculation and interpretation of some of these ratios.

Exhibit 9: Cash Flow Ratios

| Performance Ratios | Calculation | What It Measures |
| :--- | :--- | :--- |
| Cash flow to revenue | $\mathrm{CFO} \div$ Net revenue | Operating cash generated per dollar of revenue |
| Cash return on assets | CFO $\div$ Average total assets | Operating cash generated per dollar of asset investment |
| Cash return on equity | $\mathrm{CFO} \div$ Average shareholders' equity | Operating cash generated per dollar of owner investment |
| Cash to income | CFO $\div$ Operating income | Cash generating ability of operations |
| Cash flow per share ${ }^{\text {a }}$ | (CFO - Preferred dividends) $\div$ Number of common shares outstanding | Operating cash flow on a per-share basis |
| Coverage Ratios | Calculation | What It Measures |
| Debt coverage | CFO $\div$ Total debt | Financial risk and financial leverage |
|  | $(\mathrm{CFO}+$ Interest paid + Taxes paid) $\div$ Interest |  |
| Interest coverage ${ }^{\text {b }}$ | paid | Ability to meet interest obligations |
|  |  | Ability to acquire assets with operating cash |
| $\mathrm{CFO} \div$ Cash paid for long-term debt <br> flows |  |  |
|  |  |  |
| Debt payment | repayment | Ability to pay debts with operating cash flows |


| Coverage Ratios | Calculation | What It Measures |
| :--- | :--- | :--- |
| Dividend payment | $\mathrm{CFO} \div$ Dividends paid | Ability to pay dividends with operating cash flows |
| Investing and financing | $\mathrm{CFO} \div$ Cash outflows for investing and financing activities | Ability to acquire assets, pay debts, and make distributions to owners |

Notes:
${ }^{\text {a }}$ If the company reports under IFRS and includes total dividends paid as a use of cash in the operating section, total dividends should be added back to CFO as reported and then preferred dividends should be subtracted. Recall that CFO reported under US GAAP and IFRS may differ depending on the treatment of interest and dividends, received and paid.
${ }^{\text {b }}$ If the company reports under IFRS and included interest paid as a use of cash in the financing section, then interest paid should not be added back to the numerator.

## EXAMPLE 3

## A Cash Flow Analysis of Comparables

1. Andrew Potter is analyzing operating cash flow trends for Microsoft and Apple, which are presented in Exhibits 10 and 11.

Exhibit 10: Cash Flow from Operating Activities as a Percentage of Total Net Revenue

|  | 2017 | 2016 | 2015 |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| Microsoft | 43.9\% | 39.1\% | 31.7\% |
| Apple Inc. | 27.7\% | 30.5\% | 34.8\% |

Exhibit 11: Cash Flow from Operating Activities as a Percentage of Average Total Assets

|  | 2017 | 2016 | 2015 |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| Microsoft | 18.2\% | 18.1\% | 17.1\% |
| Apple Inc. | 18.2\% | 21.5\% | 31.1\% |

What is Potter most likely to conclude about the relative operating cash-flow-generating ability of these two companies?

## Solution:

On both measures-operating cash flow divided by revenue and operating cash flow divided by assets-both companies have overall strong results. However, Microsoft has higher cash flow from operating activities as a percentage of revenues in both 2016 and 2017. Further, Microsoft has an increasing trend. While Apple had a higher operating cash flow as a percent of revenue in 2015 compared to Microsoft, it has had a declining trend and was below Microsoft in the two more recent years. Microsoft's operating

