- Under International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS), inventories are measured at the lower of cost and net realizable value. Net realizable value is the estimated selling price in the ordinary course of business less the estimated costs necessary to make the sale. Under US GAAP, inventories are measured at the lower of cost, market value, or net realizable value depending upon the inventory method used. Market value is defined as the current replacement cost subject to an upper limit of net realizable value and a lower limit of net realizable value less a normal profit margin. Reversals of previous write-downs are permissible under IFRS but not under US GAAP.
- Reversals of inventory write-downs may occur under IFRS but are not allowed under US GAAP.
- Changes in the carrying amounts within inventory classifications (such as raw materials, work-in-process, and finished goods) may provide signals about a company's future sales and profits. Relevant information with respect to inventory management and future sales may be found in the management discussion and analysis or similar section within the annual or quarterly reports, industry news and publications, and industry economic data.
- The inventory turnover ratio, number of days of inventory ratio, and gross profit margin ratio are useful in evaluating the management of a company's inventory.
- Financial statement disclosures provide information regarding the accounting policies adopted in measuring inventories, the principal uncertainties regarding the use of estimates related to inventories, and details of the inventory carrying amounts and costs. This information can greatly assist analysts in their evaluation of a company's inventory management.


## INVENTORY VALUATION

describe the measurement of inventory at the lower of cost and net realisable value and its implications for financial statements and ratios

Significant financial risk can result from the holding of inventory. The cost of inventory may not be recoverable due to spoilage, obsolescence, or declines in selling prices. IFRS states that inventories shall be measured (and carried on the balance sheet) at the lower of cost and net realizable value. ${ }^{1}$ Net realizable value is the estimated selling price in the ordinary course of business, less the estimated costs necessary to make the sale and estimated costs to get the inventory in condition for sale. The assessment of net realizable value is typically done item by item or by groups of similar or related items. In the event that the value of inventory declines below the carrying amount on the balance sheet, the inventory carrying amount must be written down to its net

1 IAS 2, paragraphs 28-33, Inventories- Net realizable value.
realizable value ${ }^{2}$ and the loss (reduction in value) recognized as an expense on the income statement. This expense may be included as part of cost of sales or reported separately.

In each subsequent period, a new assessment of net realizable value is made. Reversal (limited to the amount of the original write-down) is required for a subsequent increase in value of inventory previously written down. The reversal of any write-down of inventories is recognized as a reduction in cost of sales (reduction in the amount of inventories recognized as an expense).

US GAAP used to specify the lower of cost or market to value inventories. ${ }^{3}$ For fiscal years beginning after 15 December 2016, inventories measured using other than last-in, first-out (LIFO) and retail inventory methods are measured at the lower of cost or net realizable value. This is broadly consistent with IFRS with one major difference: US GAAP prohibits the reversal of write-downs. For inventories measured using LIFO and retail inventory methods, market value is defined as current replacement cost subject to upper and lower limits. Market value cannot exceed net realizable value (i.e., the selling price less reasonably estimated costs of completion and disposal). The lower limit of market value is net realizable value less a normal profit margin. Any write-down to market value or net realizable value reduces the value of the inventory, and the loss in value (expense) generally is reflected in the income statement in the cost of goods sold.

An inventory write-down reduces both profit and the carrying amount of inventory on the balance sheet and thus has a negative effect on profitability, liquidity, and solvency ratios. However, activity ratios (e.g., inventory turnover and total asset turnover) will be positively affected by a write-down because the asset base (denominator) is reduced. The negative impact on some key ratios, due to the decrease in profit, may result in the reluctance by some companies to record inventory write-downs unless evidence is strong that the decline in the value of inventory is permanent. This is especially true under US GAAP, in which case reversal of a write-down is prohibited.

International Accounting Standards 2 (IAS 2), Inventories, does not apply to the inventories of producers of agricultural and forest products and minerals and mineral products, nor to commodity broker-traders. These inventories may be measured at net realizable value (fair value less costs to sell and complete) according to well-established industry practices. If an active market exists for these products, the quoted market price in that market is the appropriate basis for determining the fair value of that asset. If an active market does not exist, a company may use market determined prices or values (such as the most recent market transaction price) when available for determining fair value. Changes in the value of inventory (increase or decrease) are recognized in profit or loss in the period of the change. US GAAP is similar to IFRS in its treatment of inventories of agricultural and forest products and mineral ores. Mark-to-market inventory accounting is allowed for bullion.

## EXAMPLE 1

## Accounting for Declines and Recoveries of Inventory Value

Hatsumei Enterprises, a hypothetical company, manufactures computers and prepares its financial statements in accordance with IFRS. In 2017, the cost of ending inventory was EUR5.2 million, but its net realizable value was EUR4.9

2 Frequently, rather than writing down inventory directly, an inventory valuation allowance account is used. The allowance account is netted with the inventory accounts to arrive at the carrying amount that appears on the balance sheet.
3 Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB), Accounting Standards Codification (ASC), Section 330-10-35, Inventory-Overall-Subsequent Measurement.
million. The current replacement cost of the inventory is EUR4.7 million. This figure exceeds the net realizable value less a normal profit margin. In 2018, the net realizable value of Hatsumei's inventory was EUR0.5 million greater than the carrying amount.

1. What was the effect of the write-down on Hatsumei's 2017 financial statements? What was the effect of the recovery on Hatsumei's 2018 financial statements?

## Solution:

For 2017, Hatsumei would write down its inventory to EUR4.9 million and record the change in value of EUR0.3 million as an expense on the income statement. For 2018, Hatsumei would increase the carrying amount of its inventory and reduce the cost of sales by EUR0.3 million (the recovery is limited to the amount of the original write-down).
2. Under US GAAP, if Hatsumei used the LIFO method, what would be the effects of the write-down on Hatsumei's 2017 financial statements and of the recovery on Hatsumei's 2018 financial statements?

## Solution:

Under US GAAP, for 2017, Hatsumei would write down its inventory to EUR4.7 million and typically include the change in value of EUR0.5 million in cost of goods sold on the income statement. For 2018, Hatsumei would not reverse the write-down.
3. What would be the effect of the recovery on Hatsumei's 2018 financial statements if Hatsumei's inventory were agricultural products instead of computers?

## Solution:

If Hatsumei's inventory were agricultural products instead of computers, inventory would be measured at net realizable value and Hatsumei, therefore, would increase inventory and record a gain of EUR0.5 million for 2018.

Analysts should consider the possibility of an inventory write-down because the impact on a company's financial ratios may be substantial. The potential for inventory write-downs can be high for companies in industries in which technological obsolescence of inventories is a significant risk. Analysts should carefully evaluate prospective inventory impairments (as well as other potential asset impairments) and their potential effects on the financial ratios when debt covenants include financial ratio requirements. The breaching of debt covenants can have a significant impact on a company.

Companies that use specific identification, weighted average cost, or FIFO methods are more likely to incur inventory write-downs than companies that use the LIFO method. Under the LIFO method, the oldest costs are reflected in the inventory carrying amount on the balance sheet. Given increasing inventory costs, the inventory carrying amounts under the LIFO method are already conservatively presented at the oldest and lowest costs. Thus, it is far less likely that inventory write-downs will occur under LIFO-and if a write-down does occur, it is likely to be of a lesser magnitude.

## EXAMPLE 2

## Effect of Inventory Write-Downs on Financial Ratios

The Volvo Group, based in Göteborg, Sweden, is a leading supplier of commercial transport products, such as construction equipment, trucks, busses, and drive systems for marine and industrial applications as well as aircraft engine components. ${ }^{4}$ Excerpts from Volvo's consolidated financial statements are shown in Exhibits 1 and 2. Notes pertaining to Volvo's inventories are presented in Exhibit 3.

Exhibit 1: Volvo Group Consolidated Income Statements (Swedish krona in millions, except per share data)

| For the years ended 31 December | 2017 | 2016 | 2015 |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| Net sales | 334,748 | 301,914 | 312,515 |
| Cost of sales | $(254,581)$ | $(231,602)$ | $(240,653)$ |
| Gross income | 80,167 | 70,312 | 71,862 |
| $\vdots$ | $\vdots$ | $\vdots$ | $\vdots$ |
| Operating income | 30,327 | 20,826 | 23,318 |
| Interest income and similar credits | 164 | 240 | 257 |
| Income expenses and similar charges | $(1,852)$ | $(1,847)$ | $(2,366)$ |
| Other financial income and expenses | (386) | 11 | (792) |
| Income after financial items | 28,254 | 19,230 | 20,418 |
| Income taxes | $(6,971)$ | $(6,008)$ | $(5,320)$ |
| Income for the period | 21,283 | 13,223 | 15,099 |
| Attributable to: |  |  |  |
| Equity holders of the parent company | 20,981 | 13,147 | 15,058 |
| Minority interests | 302 | 76 | 41 |
| Profit | 21,283 | 13,223 | 15,099 |

Exhibit 2: Volvo Group Consolidated Balance Sheets (Swedish krona in millions)

| 31 December | 2017 | 2016 | 2015 |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| Assets |  |  |  |
| Total non-current assets | 213,455 | 218,465 | 203,478 |
| Current assets: |  |  |  |
| Inventories | 52,701 | 48,287 | 44,390 |
|  |  |  |  |
| Cash and cash equivalents | 36,092 | 23,949 | 21,048 |
| Total current assets | 199,039 | 180,301 | 170,687 |
| Total assets | 412,494 | 398,916 | 374,165 |
| Shareholders' equity and liabilities |  |  |  |

[^0]| 31 December | 2017 | 2016 | 2015 |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| Equity attributable to equity holders of the parent company | 107,069 | 96,061 | 83,810 |
| Minority interests | 1,941 | 1,703 | 1,801 |
| Total shareholders' equity | 109,011 | 97,764 | 85,610 |
| Total non-current provisions | 29,147 | 29,744 | 26,704 |
| Total non-current liabilities | 96,213 | 104,873 | 91,814 |
| Total current provisions | 10,806 | 11,333 | 14,176 |
| Total current liabilities | 167,317 | 155,202 | 155,860 |
| Total shareholders' equity and liabilities | 412,404 | 398,916 | 374,165 |

## Exhibit 3: Volvo Group Selected Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements

## Note 17. Inventories

## Accounting Policy

Inventories are reported at the lower of cost and net realizable value. The cost is established using the first-in, first-out principle (FIFO) and is based on the standard cost method, including costs for all direct manufacturing expenses and the attributable share of capacity and other related manufacturing-related costs. The standard costs are tested regularly and adjustments are made based on current conditions. Costs for research and development, selling, administration and financial expenses are not included. Net realizable value is calculated as the selling price less costs attributable to the sale.

Sources of Estimation Uncertainty
Inventory obsolescence
If the net realizable value is lower than cost, a valuation allowance is established for inventory obsolescence. The total inventory value, net of inventory obsolescence allowance, was SEK52,701 (in millions) as of December 2017, and SEK48,287 as of 31 December 2016.

## Panel A: Inventory

| 31 December (millions of krona) | 2017 | 2016 | 2015 |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| Finished products | 32,304 | 31,012 | 27,496 |
| Production materials, etc. | 20,397 | 17,275 | 16,894 |
| Total | 52,701 | 48,287 | 44,390 |

Panel B: Increase (decrease) in allowance for inventory obsolescence

| 31 December (millions of krona) | 2017 | 2016 | 2015 |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| Opening balance | 3,683 | 3,624 | 3,394 |
| Change in allowance for inventory obsolescence charged to income | 304 | 480 | 675 |
| Scrapping | (391) | (576) | (435) |


| $\mathbf{3 1}$ December (millions of krona) | $\mathbf{2 0 1 7}$ | $\mathbf{2 0 1 6}$ | $\mathbf{2 0 1 5}$ |
| :--- | :---: | :---: | :---: |
| Translation differences | $(116)$ | 177 | $(29)$ |
| Reclassifications, etc. | 8 | $(23)$ | 20 |
| Allowance for inventory obsolescence as of 31 December | 3,489 | 3,683 | 3,624 |

1. What inventory values would Volvo have reported for 2017, 2016, and 2015 if it had no allowance for inventory obsolescence?
Solution:

| $\mathbf{3 1}$ December (Swedish krona in millions) | $\mathbf{2 0 1 7}$ | $\mathbf{2 0 1 6}$ | $\mathbf{2 0 1 5}$ |
| :--- | :---: | :---: | :---: |
| Total inventories, net | 52,701 | 48,287 | 44,390 |
| From Note 17. (Allowance for obsolescence) | 3,489 | 3,683 | 3,624 |
| Total inventories (without allowance) | 56,190 | 51,970 | 48,014 |

2. Assuming that any changes to the allowance for inventory obsolescence are reflected in the cost of sales, what amount would Volvo's cost of sales be for 2017 and 2016 if it had not recorded inventory write-downs in 2017 and 2016?

Solution:

| $\mathbf{3 1}$ December (Swedish krona in millions) | $\mathbf{2 0 1 7}$ | $\mathbf{2 0 1 6}$ |
| :--- | :---: | :---: |
| Cost of sales | 254,581 | 231,602 |
| (Increase) decrease in allowance for obsolescence** | 194 | $(59)$ |
| Cost of sales without allowance | 254,775 | 231,543 |

* From Note 17, the decrease in the allowance for obsolescence for 2017 is $194(3,489-3,683)$ and the increase for 2016 is 59 (3,683-3,624).

3. What amount would Volvo's profit (net income) be for 2017 and 2016 if it had not recorded inventory write-downs in 2017 and 2016? Volvo's effective income tax rate was reported as 25 percent for 2017 and 31 percent for 2016.

Solution:

| $\mathbf{3 1}$ December (Swedish krona in millions) | $\mathbf{2 0 1 7}$ | $\mathbf{2 0 1 6}$ |
| :--- | :---: | :---: |
| Profit (Net income) | 21,283 | 13,223 |
| Increase (reduction) in cost of sales | $(194)$ | 59 |
| Taxes (tax reduction) on operating profit* | 49 | $(18)$ |
| Profit (without allowance) | 21,138 | 13,264 |

[^1]4. What would Volvo's 2017 profit (net income) have been if it had reversed all past inventory write-downs in 2017? This question is independent of 1,2 , and 3. The effective income tax rate was 25 percent for 2017.
Solution:

| $\mathbf{3 1}$ December (Swedish krona in millions) | $\mathbf{2 0 1 7}$ |
| :--- | :---: |
| Profit (Net income) | 21,283 |
| Reduction in cost of sales (increase in operating profit) | 3,489 |
| Taxes on increased operating profit* | -872 |
| Profit (after recovery of previous write-downs) | 23,900 |

* Taxes on the increased operating profit are assumed to be $872(3,489 \times 25 \%)$ for 2017.

5. Compare the following for 2017 based on the numbers as reported and those assuming no allowance for inventory obsolescence as in questions 1, 2, and 3: inventory turnover ratio, days of inventory on hand, gross profit margin, and net profit margin.

## Solution:

The Volvo Group's financial ratios for 2017 with the allowance for inventory obsolescence and without the allowance for inventory obsolescence are as follows:

|  | With Allowance (As Reported) | Without Allowance (Adjusted) |
| :--- | :--- | :--- |
| Inventory turnover ratio | 5.04 | 4.71 |
| Days of inventory on hand | 72.4 | 77.5 |
| Gross profit margin | 23.95\% | 23.89\% |
| Net profit margin | 6.36\% | 6.31\% |

Inventory turnover ratio $=$ Cost of sales $\div$ Average inventory
With allowance $($ as reported $)=5.04=254,581 \div[(52,701+48,287) \div 2]$
Without allowance $($ adjusted $)=4.71=254,775 \div[(56,190+51,970) \div 2]$
Inventory turnover is higher based on the numbers as reported because inventory carrying amounts will be lower with an allowance for inventory obsolescence. The company might appear to manage its inventory more efficiently when it has inventory write-downs.

Days of inventory on hand
$=$ Number of days in period $\div$ Inventory turnover ratio
With allowance $($ as reported $)=72.4$ days $=(365$ days $\div 5.04)$
Without allowance $($ adjusted $)=77.5$ days $=(365$ days $\div 4.71)$
Days of inventory on hand are lower based on the numbers as reported because the inventory turnover is higher. A company with inventory write-downs might appear to manage its inventory more effectively. This is primarily the result of the lower inventory carrying amounts.

Gross profit margin $=$ Gross profit $\div$ Net sales
With allowance $($ as reported $)=23.95 \%=(80,167 \div 334,748)$
Without allowance $($ adjusted $)=23.89 \%=[(80,167-194) \div 334,748]$
In this instance, the gross profit margin is slightly higher with inventory write-downs because the cost of sales is lower (due to the reduction in the allowance for inventory obsolescence). This assumes that inventory writedowns (and inventory write-down recoveries) are reported as part of cost of sales.

Net profit margin $=$ Profit $\div$ Net sales
With allowance $($ as reported $)=6.36 \%=(21,283 \div 334,748)$
Without allowance $($ adjusted $)=6.31 \%=(21,138 \div 334,748)$
In this instance, the net profit margin is higher with inventory write-downs because the cost of sales is lower (due to the reduction in the allowance for inventory obsolescence). The absolute percentage difference is less than that of the gross profit margin because of the income tax reduction on the decreased income without write-downs.
The profitability ratios (gross profit margin and net profit margin) for Volvo Group would have been slightly lower for 2017 if the company had not recorded inventory write-downs. The activity ratio (inventory turnover ratio) would appear less attractive without the write-downs. The inventory turnover ratio is slightly better (higher) with inventory write-downs because inventory write-downs decrease the average inventory (denominator), making inventory management appear more efficient with write-downs.

THE EFFECTS OF INFLATION AND DEFLATION ON INVENTORIES, COSTS OF SALES, AND GROSS MARGIN
calculate and explain how inflation and deflation of inventory costs affect the financial statements and ratios of companies that use different inventory valuation methods

The allocation of the total cost of goods available for sale to cost of sales on the income statement and to ending inventory on the balance sheet varies under the different inventory valuation methods. In an environment of declining inventory unit costs and constant or increasing inventory quantities, first-in, first-out (FIFO) (in comparison with weighted average cost or LIFO) will allocate a higher amount of the total cost of goods available for sale to cost of sales on the income statement and a lower amount to ending inventory on the balance sheet. Accordingly, because cost of sales will be higher under FIFO, a company's gross profit, operating profit, and income before taxes will be lower.

Conversely, in an environment of rising inventory unit costs and constant or increasing inventory quantities, FIFO (in comparison with weighted average cost or LIFO) will allocate a lower amount of the total cost of goods available for sale to cost


[^0]:    4 The Volvo line of automobiles has not been under the control and management of the Volvo Group since 1999.

[^1]:    * Taxes (tax deductions) on the operating profit are assumed to be 49 (194 $\times 25 \%$ ) for 2017 and $-18(-59 \times 31 \%)$ for 2016.

