Gross profit margin $=$ Gross profit $\div$ Net sales
With allowance $($ as reported $)=23.95 \%=(80,167 \div 334,748)$
Without allowance $($ adjusted $)=23.89 \%=[(80,167-194) \div 334,748]$
In this instance, the gross profit margin is slightly higher with inventory write-downs because the cost of sales is lower (due to the reduction in the allowance for inventory obsolescence). This assumes that inventory writedowns (and inventory write-down recoveries) are reported as part of cost of sales.

Net profit margin $=$ Profit $\div$ Net sales
With allowance $($ as reported $)=6.36 \%=(21,283 \div 334,748)$
Without allowance $($ adjusted $)=6.31 \%=(21,138 \div 334,748)$
In this instance, the net profit margin is higher with inventory write-downs because the cost of sales is lower (due to the reduction in the allowance for inventory obsolescence). The absolute percentage difference is less than that of the gross profit margin because of the income tax reduction on the decreased income without write-downs.
The profitability ratios (gross profit margin and net profit margin) for Volvo Group would have been slightly lower for 2017 if the company had not recorded inventory write-downs. The activity ratio (inventory turnover ratio) would appear less attractive without the write-downs. The inventory turnover ratio is slightly better (higher) with inventory write-downs because inventory write-downs decrease the average inventory (denominator), making inventory management appear more efficient with write-downs.

THE EFFECTS OF INFLATION AND DEFLATION ON INVENTORIES, COSTS OF SALES, AND GROSS MARGIN
calculate and explain how inflation and deflation of inventory costs affect the financial statements and ratios of companies that use different inventory valuation methods

The allocation of the total cost of goods available for sale to cost of sales on the income statement and to ending inventory on the balance sheet varies under the different inventory valuation methods. In an environment of declining inventory unit costs and constant or increasing inventory quantities, first-in, first-out (FIFO) (in comparison with weighted average cost or LIFO) will allocate a higher amount of the total cost of goods available for sale to cost of sales on the income statement and a lower amount to ending inventory on the balance sheet. Accordingly, because cost of sales will be higher under FIFO, a company's gross profit, operating profit, and income before taxes will be lower.

Conversely, in an environment of rising inventory unit costs and constant or increasing inventory quantities, FIFO (in comparison with weighted average cost or LIFO) will allocate a lower amount of the total cost of goods available for sale to cost
of sales on the income statement and a higher amount to ending inventory on the balance sheet. Accordingly, because cost of sales will be lower under FIFO, a company's gross profit, operating profit, and income before taxes will be higher.

The carrying amount of inventories under FIFO will more closely reflect current replacement values because inventories are assumed to consist of the most recently purchased items. The cost of sales under LIFO will more closely reflect current replacement value. LIFO ending inventory amounts typically are not reflective of current replacement value because the ending inventory is assumed to be the oldest inventory and costs are allocated accordingly. Example 3 illustrates the different results obtained by using either the FIFO or LIFO methods to account for inventory.

## EXAMPLE 3

## Impact of Inflation Using LIFO Compared to FIFO

Company L and Company F are identical in all respects except that Company L uses the LIFO method and Company F uses the FIFO method. Each company has been in business for five years and maintains a base inventory of 2,000 units each year. Each year, except the first year, the number of units purchased equaled the number of units sold. Over the five year period, unit sales increased 10 percent each year and the unit purchase and selling prices increased at the beginning of each year to reflect inflation of 4 percent per year. In the first year, 20,000 units were sold at a price of USD15.00 per unit and the unit purchase price was USD8.00.

1. What was the end-of-year inventory, sales, cost of sales, and gross profit for each company for each of the five years?
Solution:

| Company L using LIFO (in USD) | Year 1 | Year 2 | Year 3 | Year 4 | Year 5 |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| Ending inventory ${ }^{\text {a }}$ | 16,000 | 16,000 | 16,000 | 16,000 | 16,000 |
| Sales ${ }^{\text {b }}$ | 300,000 | 343,200 | 392,621 | 449,158 | 513,837 |
| Cost of sales ${ }^{\text {c }}$ | 160,000 | 183,040 | 209,398 | 239,551 | 274,046 |
| Gross profit | 140,000 | 160,160 | 183,223 | 209,607 | 239,791 |

${ }^{\text {a }}$ Inventory is unchanged at USD16,000 each year (2,000 units $\times$ USD8). 2,000 of the units acquired in the first year are assumed to remain in inventory.
${ }^{\text {b }}$ Sales Year $X=(20,000 \times$ USD15 $)(1.10)^{\mathrm{X}-1}(1.04)^{\mathrm{X}-1}$. The quantity sold increases by 10 percent each year and the selling price increases by 4 percent each year.
${ }^{\mathrm{c}}$ Cost of sales Year X $=(20,000 \times$ USD8 $)(1.10)^{\mathrm{X}-1}(1.04)^{\mathrm{X}-1}$. In Year 1, 20,000 units are sold with a cost of USD8. In subsequent years, the number of units purchased equals the number of units sold and the units sold are assumed to be those purchased in the year. The quantity purchased increases by 10 percent each year and the purchase price increases by 4 percent each year.

If the company sold more units than it purchased in a year, inventory would decrease. This is referred to as LIFO liquidation. The cost of sales of the units sold in excess of those purchased would reflect the inventory carrying amount. In this example, each unit sold in excess of those purchased would have a cost of sales of USD8 and a higher gross profit.

| Company F using FIFO (in US dollars) | Year 1 | Year 2 | Year 3 | Year 4 | Year 5 |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| Ending inventory ${ }^{\text {a }}$ | 16,000 | 16,640 | 17,306 | 17,998 | 18,718 |
| Sales ${ }^{\text {b }}$ | 300,000 | 343,200 | 392,621 | 449,158 | 513,837 |
| Cost of sales ${ }^{\text {c }}$ | 160,000 | 182,400 | 208,732 | 238,859 | 273,326 |
| Gross profit | 140,000 | 160,800 | 183,889 | 210,299 | 240,511 |

${ }^{\text {a }}$ Ending Inventory Year X $=2,000$ units $\times$ Cost in Year X $=2,000$ units [USD $8 \times(1.04)^{\text {X-1 }}$ ]; 2,000 units of the units acquired in Year $X$ are assumed to remain in inventory.
${ }^{\mathrm{b}}$ Sales Year X $=(20,000 \times$ USD15 $)(1.10)^{\mathrm{X}-1}(1.04)^{\mathrm{X}-1}$.
${ }^{\text {c }}$ Cost of sales Year $1=$ USD160,000 ( $=20,000$ units $\times$ USD8). There was no beginning inventory.
Cost of sales Year X (where $\mathrm{X} \neq 1$ )
$=$ Beginning inventory plus purchases less ending inventory
$=($ Inventory at Year X-1 $)+\left[(20,000 \times\right.$ USD8 $\left.)(1.10)^{\mathrm{X}-1}(1.04)^{\mathrm{X}-1}\right]$

- (Inventory at Year X)
$=2,000(\mathrm{USD} 8)(1.04)^{\mathrm{X}-2}+\left[(20,000 \times \mathrm{USD} 8)(1.10)^{\mathrm{X}-1}(1.04)^{\mathrm{X}-1}\right]-[2,000$ $\left.(\mathrm{USD} 8)(1.04)^{\mathrm{X}-1}\right]$.

For example, cost of sales Year 2
$=2,000(\mathrm{USD} 8)+[(20,000 \times \mathrm{USD} 8)(1.10)(1.04)]-[2,000(\mathrm{USD} 8)(1.04)]$
$=$ USD16,000 + USD183,040 - USD16,640 = USD182,400.
2. Compare the inventory turnover ratios (based on ending inventory carrying amounts) and gross profit margins over the five-year period and between companies.
Solution:

| Year | Company L |  |  |  |  | Company F |  |  |  |  |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
|  | 1 | 2 | 3 | 4 | 5 | 1 | 2 | 3 | 4 | 5 |
| Inventory turnover | 10.0 | 11.4 | 13.1 | 15.0 | 17.1 | 10.0 | 11.0 | 12.1 | 13.3 | 14.6 |
| Gross profit margin (\%) | 46.7 | 46.7 | 46.7 | 46.7 | 46.7 | 46.7 | 46.9 | 46.8 | 46.8 | 46.8 |

Inventory turnover ratio $=$ Cost of sales $\div$ Ending inventory.
The inventory turnover ratio increased each year for both companies because the units sold increased, whereas the units in ending inventory remained unchanged. The increase in the inventory turnover ratio is higher for Company L because Company L's cost of sales is increasing for inflation, but the inventory carrying amount is unaffected by inflation. It might appear that a company using the LIFO method manages its inventory more effectively, but this is deceptive. Both companies have identical quantities and prices of purchases and sales and only differ in the inventory valuation method used.

Gross profit margin $=$ Gross profit $\div$ Sales.
The gross profit margin is stable under LIFO because both sales and cost of sales increase at the same rate of inflation. The gross profit margin is slightly
higher under the FIFO method after the first year because a proportion of the cost of sales reflects an older purchase price.

## PRESENTATION AND DISCLOSURE

describe the presentation and disclosures relating to inventories and explain issues that analysts should consider when examining a company's inventory disclosures and other sources of information

The choice of inventory valuation method affects the financial statements. The financial statement items affected include cost of sales, gross profit, net income, inventories, current assets, and total assets. Therefore, the choice of inventory valuation method also affects financial ratios that contain these items. Ratios such as current ratio, return on assets, gross profit margin, and inventory turnover also are affected. As a consequence, analysts must carefully consider inventory valuation method differences when evaluating a company's performance over time or when comparing its performance with the performance of the industry or industry competitors. Additionally, the financial statement items and ratios may be affected by adjustments of inventory carrying amounts to net realizable value or current replacement cost.

## Presentation and Disclosure

IFRS requires the following financial statement disclosures concerning inventory:
a. the accounting policies adopted in measuring inventories, including the cost formula (inventory valuation method) used;
b. the total carrying amount of inventories and the carrying amount in classifications (e.g., merchandise, raw materials, production supplies, work in progress, and finished goods) appropriate to the entity;
c. the carrying amount of inventories carried at fair value less costs to sell;
d. the amount of inventories recognized as an expense during the period (cost of sales);
e. the amount of any write-down of inventories recognized as an expense in the period;
f. the amount of any reversal of any write-down that is recognized as a reduction in cost of sales in the period;
g. the circumstances or events that led to the reversal of a write-down of inventories; and
h. the carrying amount of inventories pledged as security for liabilities.

Inventory-related disclosures under US GAAP are similar to these disclosures, except that requirements $(f)$ and $(g)$ are not relevant because US GAAP does not permit the reversal of prior-year inventory write-downs. US GAAP also requires the disclosure of significant estimates applicable to inventories and of any material amount of income resulting from the liquidation of LIFO inventory.

