FCA's spin-off was completed on 3 January 2016, with each FCA shareholder receiving one common share of Ferrari N.V. for every ten common shares of FCA. In its financial statements for the prior fiscal year, FCA shows the assets and liabilities of Ferrari as held for distribution. Specifically, its balance sheet includes $€ 3,650$ million in Assets Held for Distribution as a component of current assets and $€ 3,584$ million Liabilities Held for Distribution. Exhibit 2 includes excerpts from the company's 31 December 2015 annual report.

## Exhibit 2: Excerpt from Fiat Chrysler Automobiles (FCA) Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements, 2015 Annual Report

## Ferrari Spin-off and Discontinued Operations

"As the spin-off of Ferrari N.V. became highly probable with the aforementioned shareholders' approval and since it was available for immediate distribution at that date, the Ferrari segment met the criteria to be classified as a disposal group held for distribution to owners and a discontinued operation pursuant to IFRS 5 - Non-current Assets Held for Sale and Discontinued Operations."

The following assets and liabilities of the Ferrari segment were classified as held for distribution on 31 December 2015:

|  | At 31 December 2015 |
| :--- | :--- |
| Assets classified as held for distribution | (euro millions) |
| Goodwill | 786 |
| Other intangible assets | 297 |
| Property, plant, and equipment | 627 |
| Other non-current assets | 134 |
| Receivables from financing activities | 1,176 |
| Cash and cash equivalents | 182 |
| Other current assets | 448 |
| Total Assets held for distribution | 3,650 |
| Liabilities classified as held for distribution |  |
| Provisions | 224 |
| Debt | 2,256 |
| Other current liabilities | 624 |
| Trade payables | 480 |
| Total Liabilities held for distribution | 3,584 |
|  |  |

## 4 PRESENTATION AND DISCLOSURE

analyze and interpret financial statement disclosures regarding property, plant, and equipment and intangible assets

Under IFRS, for each class of property, plant, and equipment, a company must disclose the measurement basis, the depreciation method, the useful life (or, equivalently, the depreciation rate) used, the gross carrying amount, and the accumulated depreciation at the beginning and end of the period, and a reconciliation of the carrying amount at the beginning and end of the period. ${ }^{11}$ In addition, disclosures of restrictions on title and pledges as security of property, plant, and equipment and contractual agreements to acquire property, plant, and equipment are required. If the revaluation model is used, the date of revaluation, details of how the fair value was obtained, the carrying amount under the cost model, and the revaluation surplus must be disclosed. A company must also disclose the depreciation expense for the period, the balances of major classes of depreciable assets, accumulated depreciation by major classes or in total, and a general description of the depreciation method(s) used in computing depreciation expense with respect to the major classes of depreciable assets.

Under IFRS, for each class of intangible assets, a company must disclose whether the useful lives are indefinite or finite. If finite, for each class of intangible asset, a company must disclose the useful lives (or, equivalently, the amortization rate) used, the amortization methods used, the gross carrying amount and the accumulated amortization at the beginning and end of the period, where amortization is included on the income statement, and a reconciliation of the carrying amount at the beginning and end of the period. ${ }^{12}$ If an asset has an indefinite life, the company must disclose the carrying amount of the asset and why it is considered to have an indefinite life. Similar to property, plant, and equipment, disclosures of restrictions on title and pledges as security of intangible assets and contractual agreements to acquire intangible assets are required. If the revaluation model is used, the date of revaluation, details of how the fair value was obtained, the carrying amount under the cost model, and the revaluation surplus must be disclosed.

Under US GAAP, companies are required to disclose the gross carrying amounts and accumulated amortization in total and by major class of intangible assets, the aggregate amortization expense for the period, and the estimated amortization expense for the next five fiscal years. ${ }^{13}$

The disclosures related to impairment losses also differ under IFRS and US GAAP. Under IFRS, a company must disclose for each class of assets the amounts of impairment losses and reversals of impairment losses recognized in the period and where those are recognized on the financial statements. ${ }^{14}$ The company must also disclose in aggregate the main classes of assets affected by impairment losses and reversals of impairment losses and the main events and circumstances leading to recognition of these impairment losses and reversals of impairment losses. Under US GAAP, there is no reversal of impairment losses for assets held for use. The company must disclose a description of the impaired asset, what led to the impairment, the method of determining fair value, the amount of the impairment loss, and where the loss is recognized on the financial statements. ${ }^{15}$

Disclosures about long-lived assets appear throughout the financial statements: in the balance sheet, the income statement, the statement of cash flows, and the notes. The balance sheet reports the carrying value of the asset. For the income statement, depreciation expense may or may not appear as a separate line item. Under IFRS, whether the income statement discloses depreciation expense separately depends on whether the company is using a 'nature of expense' method or a 'function of expense' method. Under the nature of expense method, a company aggregates expenses "according to their nature (e.g., depreciation, purchases of materials, transport costs, employee

11 IAS 16, Property, Plant and Equipment, paragraphs 73-79, Disclosure.
12 IAS 38, Intangible Assets, paragraphs 118-128, Disclosure.
13 FASB ASC, Section 350-30-50, Intangibles-General-Disclosure.
14 IAS 36, Impairment of Assets, paragraphs 126-137, Disclosure.
15 IAS 36, Impairment of Assets, paragraphs 126-137, Disclosure.
benefits and advertising costs), and does not reallocate them among functions within the entity." ${ }^{16}$ Under the function of expense method, a company classifies expenses according to the function, for example as part of cost of sales or of SG\&A (selling, general, and administrative) expenses. At a minimum, a company using the function of expense method must disclose cost of sales, but the other line items vary.

The statement of cash flows reflects acquisitions and disposals of fixed assets in the investing section. In addition, when prepared using the indirect method, the statement of cash flows typically shows depreciation expense (or depreciation plus amortization) as a line item in the adjustments of net income to cash flow from operations. The notes to the financial statements describe the company's accounting method(s), the range of estimated useful lives, historical cost by main category of fixed asset, accumulated depreciation, and annual depreciation expense.

The following example provides excerpts relating to intangible assets and property, plant, and equipment from the annual report of Orange SA for the year ended 31 December 2017.

## EXAMPLE 5

## Financial Statement Presentation and Disclosures for Long-Lived Assets

The following exhibits include excerpts from the annual report for the year ended 31 December 2017 of Orange SA, an international telecommunications company based in France.

## Exhibit 3: Orange SA, 2017 Consolidated Financial Statement

## Excerpt from Consolidated Income Statement (euro millions)

(Note that only selected line items/data are shown for illustrative purposes)

|  | 12 Months Ended |  |  |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
|  | 31 Dec. 2017 | 31 Dec. 2016 | 31 Dec. 2015 |
| Revenues | €41,096 | €40,918 | €40,236 |
| ... | ... | ... | ... |
| Depreciation and amortization | $(6,846)$ | $(6,728)$ | $(6,465)$ |
| ... | ... | ... | $\ldots$ |
| Impairment of goodwill | (20) | (772) |  |
| Impairment of fixed assets | (190) | (207) | (38) |
| ... | ... | ... | ... |
| Operating income | 4,917 | 4,077 | 4,742 |
| $\cdots$ | ... | ... | $\ldots$ |
| Consolidated net income of continuing operations | 2,114 | 1,010 | 2,510 |
| Consolidated net income of discontinued operations (EE) | 29 | 2,253 | 448 |
| Consolidated net income | 2,143 | 3,263 | 2,958 |

[^0]| Net income attributable to owners of the parent company | 1,906 | 2,935 | 2,652 |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| Non-controlling interests | €237 | €328 | €306 |
| Excerpt from the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position (euro millions) |  |  |  |
| Assets | 31 Dec. 2017 | 31 Dec. 2016 | 31 Dec. 2015 |
| Goodwill | €27,095 | €27,156 | €27,071 |
| Other intangible assets | 14,339 | 14,602 | 14,327 |
| Property, plant, and equipment | 26,665 | 25,912 | 25,123 |
| ... | ... | ... | ... |
| Total non-current assets | 74,035 | 74,819 | 71,330 |
| ... | ... | ... | ... |
| Total current assets | 20,679 | 19,849 | 14,312 |
| Assets held for sale |  |  | 5,788 |
| Total assets | 94,714 | 94,668 | 91,430 |
| Equity and liabilities |  |  |  |
| ... | ... | ... | ... |
| Total equity | 32,942 | 33,174 | 33,267 |
| ... | ... | ... | ... |
| Total non-current liabilities | 32,736 | 35,590 | 36,537 |
| ... | ... | ... | ... |
| Total current liabilities | 29,036 | 25,904 | 21,626 |
| Total equity and liabilities | 94,714 | 94,668 | 91,430 |

Exhibit 4: Orange SA, 2017 Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statement

Excerpt from Note 7.2 Goodwill

| Excerpt from Reconciliation of Changes in Goodwill (euro millions) |  |  |  |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
|  | 12 Months Ended |  |  |
|  | 31 Dec. 2017 | 31 Dec. 2016 | 31 Dec. 2015 |
| Gross value in the opening balance | €32,689 | €32,606 | €30,271 |
| Acquisitions | 38 | 904 | 2,333 |
| Disposals | 0 | (6) | (69) |
| Translation adjustment | (40) | (815) | 73 |
| Reclassifications and other items | 0 | 0 | (2) |
| Reclassification to assets held for sale | 0 | 0 | 0 |
| Gross value in closing balance | 32,687 | 32,689 | 32,606 |
| Accumulated impairment losses in the opening balance | $(5,533)$ | $(5,535)$ | $(5,487)$ |
| Impairment | (20) | (772) | 0 |
| Disposals | 0 | 0 | 0 |


| Excerpt from Reconciliation of Changes in Goodwill (euro millions) |  |  |  |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| 12 Months Ended |  |  |  |
|  | 31 Dec. 2017 | 31 Dec. 2016 | 31 Dec. 2015 |
| Translation adjustment | (39) | 774 | (48) |
| Reclassifications and other items | 0 | 0 | 0 |
| Reclassification to assets held for sale | 0 | 0 | 0 |
| Accumulated impairment losses in the closing balance | € $(5,592)$ | € $(5,533)$ | € $(5,535)$ |
| Net book value of goodwill | 27,095 | 27,156 | 27,071 |

Excerpt* from Note 7.3 Key assumptions used to determine recoverable amounts as of 31 December 2017*

The parameters used for the determination of recoverable amount of the main consolidated operations are set forth below:

|  | France | Spain | Poland | Belgium | Romania |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| Perpetuity growth rate | 0.8\% | 1.5\% | 1.0\% | 0.5\% | 2.3\% |
| Post-tax discount rate | 5.5\% | 8.6\% | 8.3\% | 6.8\% | 8.8\% |

Excerpt from Note 7.4 Sensitivity of recoverable amounts as of 31 December 2017*

The level of sensitivity presented allows readers of the financial statements to estimate the impact in their own assessment.

| (in billions of euros) | France | Spain | Poland | Belgium | Romania |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| Decrease by 1\% in perpetuity growth rate | 10.4 | 1.6 | 0.6 | 0.3 | 0.3 |
| An increase by 1\% in post-tax discount rate | 11.4 | 2.0 | 0.6 | 0.3 | 0.3 |

* Table extracted presents only selected assumptions and selected countries.

The company's annual report provides more detail.
"Goodwill is not amortized. It is tested for impairment at least annually and more frequently when there is an indication that it may be impaired .... These tests are performed at the level of each Cash Generating Unit (CGU) (or group of CGUs)... To determine whether an impairment loss should be recognized, the carrying value of the assets and liabilities of the CGUs or groups of CGUs is compared to recoverable amount, for which Orange uses mostly the value in use.... Value in use is the present value of the future expected cash flows. Cash flow projections are based on economic and regulatory assumptions, license renewal assumptions and forecast trading and investment activity drawn up by the Group's management..."

Excerpt from Note 8.3 Other intangible assets-Net book value

|  | 31 December |  |  |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| (in millions of euros) | 2017 | 2016 | 2015 |
| Telecommunications licenses | 6,233 | 6,440 | 5,842 |
| Orange brand | 3,133 | 3,133 | 3,133 |
| Other brands | 88 | 102 | 137 |
| Customer bases | 555 | 703 | 729 |
| Software | 3,946 | 3,781 | 3,815 |
| Other intangible assets | 384 | 443 | 671 |
| Total | €14,339 | €14,602 | €14,327 |

Excerpt from Note 8.4 Property, plant and equipment-Net book value

| (in millions of euros) | 31 December |  |  |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
|  | 2017 | 2016 | 2015 |
| Land and buildings | 2,535 | 2,661 | 2,733 |
| Network and terminals | 22,880 | 21,984 | 21,194 |
| IT equipment | 802 | 784 | 787 |
| Other property, plant, and equipment | 448 | 483 | 409 |
| Total | €26,665 | €25,912 | €25,123 |

## Exhibit 5: Orange SA, 2017 Analysis of the Group's Financial Position and Earnings

"Orange group operating income stood at 4,077 million euros in 2016, compared with 4,742 million euros in 2015 on a historical basis, a drop of $14.0 \%$ or 665 million euros. This drop on a historical basis was largely attributable to:

- the recognition, in 2016, of 772 million euros in impairment loss of goodwill ... and 207 million euros in impairment loss of fixed assets ... primarily relating to:
- Poland for 507 million euros. This impairment loss mainly reflects a decline in competitiveness in the ADSL market, a deterioration in revenue assumptions in the mobile market and an increase in the post-tax discount rate due to the downgrading of the country's sovereign rating by the rating agencies,
- Egypt for 232 million euros. This impairment loss reflects the financial terms of the 4G license awarded in 2016, the sharp depreciation of the Egyptian pound and increased political and economic uncertainty,
- in the Congo (DRC), for 109 million euros. This impairment loss reflects political and economic uncertainty, a decline in purchasing power with a knock-on effect on the consumption of telecommunications products and services and an increased regulatory burden (particularly connected with the implementation of customer identification),
- Cameroon for 90 million euros. This impairment loss reflects a decline in voice revenues following the surge in messaging services and in VoIP of Over-The-Top (OTT) providers and heightened competition in the mobile market,
- and Niger for 26 million euros;
- and the 263 million euro increase in depreciation and amortization."

1. What proportion of Orange's total assets as of 31 December 2017 is represented by goodwill and other intangible assets?
Solution:
As of 31 December 2017, goodwill represents 28.6 percent ( $=27,095 \div$ $94,714)$ of Orange's total assets. Other intangible assets represent 15.1 percent $(=14,339 \div 94,714)$. Data are from the company's balance sheet in Exhibit 3.
2. What is the largest component of the company's impairment losses during the year ending December 2016?

## Solution:

The largest component of the EUR772 impairment loss on goodwill and the EUR207 million impairment loss of fixed assets related to a EUR507 million loss in Poland. The company attributed the loss to a decline in the competitiveness of the market for its ADSL technology, a reduction in revenue assumptions, and an increase in the discount rate resulting from the downgrading of the country's debt rating. From Exhibit 4: [The company's financial statements define ADSL (Asymmetrical Digital Subscriber Line) as a "broadband data transmission technology on the traditional telephone network. It enables broadband data transmission (first and foremost Internet access) via twisted paired copper cable (the most common type of telephone line found in buildings)."]
3. The company discloses that it determines whether an impairment loss should be recognized by comparing the carrying value of a unit's assets and liabilities to the "recoverable amount," equal to the company's estimate of its value in use. How does the company determine value in use?

## Solution:

The company determines value in use - which it uses as a unit's assets and liabilities "recoverable amount" in impairment testing - as the present value of the future expected cash flows. The cash flow projections are based on management's assumptions. From Note 7.4 in Exhibit 4.
4. By what amount would the estimated recoverable value of the company's operations in France, Spain, Poland, Belgium, and Romania change if the company decreased its estimate of the perpetuity growth rate by 1 percent? By what amount would the estimated recoverable value of these operations change if the company increased its estimate of the post-tax discount rate by 1 percent?

## Solution:

If the company decreased its estimate of the perpetuity growth rate by 1 percent, the estimated recoverable value of the company's operations in

France, Spain, Poland, Belgium and Romania would be reduced by EUR13.2 billion ( $=10.4+1.6+0.6+0.3+0.3$ ). A decrease in estimated growth decreases the present value of the cash flows. If the company increased its estimate of the post-tax discount rate by 1 percent, the estimated recoverable value of these operations would be reduced by EUR14.6 billion ( $=11.4+$ $2.0+0.6+0.3+0.3)$. An increase in the discount rate decreases the present value of cash flows. Data are from Note 7.4 in Exhibit 4.
5. What are the largest components of other intangible assets as of 31 December 2017? What is the largest component of property, plant and equipment as of 31 December 2017?

## Solution:

The largest components of other intangible assets as of 31 December 2017 are telecommunications licenses, software, and the Orange brand, reported at EUR6,233 million, EUR3,946 million, and EUR3,133 million, respectively. The largest component of property, plant, and equipment as of 31 December 2017 is network and terminals (EUR22,880 million). Data are from Notes 8.3 and 8.4 in Exhibit 4.

Note that the exhibits in the previous example contain relatively brief excerpts from the company's disclosures. The complete text of the disclosures concerning the company's non-current assets spans numerous different footnotes, some of which are several pages long. Overall, an analyst can use the disclosures to understand a company's investments in tangible and intangible assets, how those investments changed during a reporting period, how those changes affected current performance, and what those changes might indicate about future performance.

## USING DISCLOSURES IN ANALYSIS

analyze and interpret financial statement disclosures regarding property, plant, and equipment and intangible assets

Ratios used in analyzing fixed assets include the fixed asset turnover ratio and several asset age ratios. The fixed asset turnover ratio (total revenue divided by average net fixed assets) reflects the relationship between total revenues and investment in PPE (property, plant, \& equipment). The higher this ratio, the higher the amount of sales a company is able to generate with a given amount of investment in fixed assets. A higher asset turnover ratio is often interpreted as an indicator of greater efficiency.

Asset age ratios generally rely on the relationship between historical cost and depreciation. Under the revaluation model (permitted under IFRS but not US GAAP), the relationship between carrying amount, accumulated depreciation, and depreciation expense will differ when the carrying amount differs significantly from the depreciated historical cost. Therefore, the following discussion of asset age ratios applies primarily to PPE reported under the cost model.

Asset age and remaining useful life, two asset age ratios, are important indicators of a company's need to reinvest in productive capacity. The older the assets and the shorter the remaining life, the more a company may need to reinvest to maintain productive capacity. The average age of a company's asset base can be estimated as accumulated depreciation divided by depreciation expense. The average remaining life of a company's asset base can be estimated as net PPE divided by depreciation expense.

These estimates simply reflect the following relationships for assets accounted for on a historical cost basis: total historical cost minus accumulated depreciation equals net PPE; and, under straight-line depreciation, total historical cost less salvage value divided by estimated useful life equals annual depreciation expense. Equivalently, total historical cost less salvage value divided by annual depreciation expense equals estimated useful life. Assuming straight-line depreciation and no salvage value (for simplicity), we have the following:

| Estimated total useful life | $=$ | Time elapsed since purchase (Age) | $+$ | Estimated remaining life |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| Historical cost $\div$ annual depreciation expense | = | Estimated total useful life |  |  |
| Historical cost | = | Accumulated depreciation | + | Net PPE |
| Equivalently, |  |  |  |  |
| Estimated total useful life | = | Estimated age of equipment | $+$ | Estimated remaining life |
| Historical cost $\div$ annual depreciation expense | $=$ | Accumulated depreciation $\div$ annual depreciation expense | $+$ | Net PPE $\div$ annual depreciation expense |

The application of these estimates can be illustrated by a hypothetical example of a company with a single depreciable asset. Assume the asset initially cost USD100, had an estimated useful life of 10 years, and an estimated salvage value of USD0. Each year, the company records a depreciation expense of USD10, so accumulated depreciation will equal USD10 times the number of years since the asset was acquired (when the asset is 7 years old, accumulated depreciation will be USD70). Equivalently, the age of the asset will equal accumulated depreciation divided by the annual depreciation expense.

In practice, such estimates are difficult to make with great precision. Companies use depreciation methods other than the straight-line method and have numerous assets with varying useful lives and salvage values, including some assets that are fully depreciated, so this approach produces an estimate only. Moreover, fixed asset disclosures are often quite general. Consequently, these estimates may be primarily useful to identify areas for further investigation.

One further measure compares a company's current reinvestment in productive capacity. Comparing annual capital expenditures to annual depreciation expense provides an indication of whether productive capacity is being maintained. It is a very general indicator of the rate at which a company is replacing its PPE relative to the rate at which PPE is being depreciated.

## EXAMPLE 6

## Using Fixed Asset Disclosure to Compare Companies' Fixed Asset Turnover and Average Age of Depreciable Assets

Consider the property, plant, and equipment for the following three international telecommunications companies:

- Orange SA, which we discussed previously, has been listed on Euronext Paris (symbol ORA) and on the New York Stock Exchange (symbol ORAN) since 1997. At 31 December 2017, the French government retained 22.95 percent of the share capital.
- BCE Inc., Canada's largest communications company, provides wireless, wireline, Internet, TV, and business communications across Canada. BCE's shares are publicly traded on the Toronto Stock Exchange and on the New York Stock Exchange (TSX, NYSE: BCE).
- Verizon Communications Inc. is a US-based global provider of communications, information, and entertainment products and services to consumers, businesses, and governmental agencies. Verizon's shares are listed on the New York Stock Exchange and the NASDAQ Global Select Market (symbol VZ).

Exhibit 6: Selected Information from the Companies' Financial Statements

|  | Orange | BCE Inc | Verizon |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| Currency, Millions of: | Euro | Canadian dollars | US dollars |
| Historical cost total PPE, end of year | 97,092 | 69,230 | 246,498 |
| Accumulated depreciation, end of year | 70,427 | 45,197 | 157,930 |
| Net PPE, end of year | 26,665 | 24,033 | 88,568 |
| Net PPE, beginning of year | 25,912 | 22,346 | 84,751 |
| Revenues | 41,096 | 22,719 | 126,034 |
| Annual depreciation expense | 4,708 | 3,037 | 14,741 |
| Capital expenditure | 5,677 | 4,149 | 17,247 |
| Land included in PPE | Not separated | Not separated | 806 |
| Accounting standards | IFRS | IFRS | US GAAP |
| PPE measurement | Historical cost | Historical cost | Historical cost |
| Depreciation method | Straight-line | Straight-line | Straight-line |

Sources: Companies' 2017 Annual Financial Reports."

1. 2. Based on the data for each company in Exhibit 5, estimate the total useful life, age, and remaining useful life of PPE.
Solution:
The following table presents the estimated total useful life, estimated age, and estimated remaining useful life of PPE for each of the companies.

| Estimates | Orange | BCE Inc | Verizon |
| :--- | :---: | :---: | :---: |
| Estimated total useful life (years) | 20.6 | 22.8 | 16.7 |
| Estimated age (years) | 15.0 | 14.9 | 10.7 |
| Estimated remaining life (years) | 5.7 | 7.9 | 6.0 |

The computations are demonstrated using Verizon's data (\$ in millions).
The estimated total useful life of PPE is total historical cost of PPE of USD246,498 divided by annual depreciation expense of USD14,741, giving 16.7 years. Estimated age and estimated remaining life are obtained by di-
viding accumulated depreciation of USD157,930 and net PPE of USD88,568 by the annual depreciation expense of USD14,741, giving 10.7 years and 6.0 years, respectively.
Ideally, the estimates of asset lives illustrated in this example should exclude land, which is not depreciable, when the information is available; however, both Orange and BCE report Land and Buildings as a combined amount. We will use Verizon, for which land appeared to be disclosed separately in the above table, to illustrate the estimates with adjusting for land. As an illustration of the calculations to exclude land, excluding Verizon's land would give an estimated total useful life for the non-land PPE of 16.7 years [(total cost EUR246,498 minus land cost of USD806) divided by annual depreciation expense of EUR14,741 million]. The estimate is essentially unchanged from the estimate including land because land represents such a small component of Verizon's PPE.
2. 2. Interpret the estimates of estimated total useful life, age, and remaining life. What items might affect comparisons across the three companies?

## Solution:

The estimated total useful life suggests that Orange and BCE depreciate PPE over a much longer period than Verizon: 20.6 and 22.8 years for Orange and BCE, respectively, versus 16.7 years for Verizon.
The estimated age of the equipment suggests that Verizon has the newest PPE with an estimated age of 10.7 years. Additionally, the estimates suggest that around 73 percent of Orange's assets' useful lives have passed (15.0 years $\div 20.6$ years, or equivalently, EUR70,427 million $\div$ EUR97,092 million). In comparison, around 65 and 64 percent of the useful lives of the PPE of BCE and Verizon, respectively, have passed.
Items that can affect comparisons across the companies include business differences, such as differences in composition of the companies' operations and differences in acquisition and divestiture activity. This result can be compared, to an extent, to the useful lives and asset mix disclosed in the companies' footnotes; however, differences in disclosures (e.g., in the categories of assets disclosed) can affect comparisons.
3. 3. How does each company's 2017 depreciation expense compare to its capital expenditures for the year?

## Solution:

All three companies' capital expenditure exceeds its depreciation expense. Rounding to the nearest 10 percent, capital expenditure as a percentage of depreciation is 120 percent for Orange, 140 percent for BCE, and 120 percent for Verizon. All three companies are replacing PPE at a faster rate than the PPE is being depreciated, consistent with the companies' somewhat older asset base.
4. 4. Calculate and compare fixed asset turnover for each company.

## Solution:

Fixed asset turnover is calculated as total revenues divided by average net PPE. Orange's fixed asset turnover is 1.6 ( $=41,096 /((26,665+25,912) / 2)$ ). BCE's fixed asset turnover is 1.0, and Verizon's fixed asset turnover is 1.5. Orange's and Verizon's higher levels of fixed asset turnover indicate these companies, compared to BCE, are able to generate more sales per unit of investment in fixed assets.


[^0]:    16 IAS 1, paragraph 102.

