| Balance Sheet | Year 1 | Year 2 | Year 3 | Year 4 | Year 5 |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| Operating lease: |  |  |  |  |  |
| Property, plant, and equipment, net | 280,000 | 210,000 | 140,000 | 70,000 | 0 |

The difference on the income statement is also material, because a finance lease lessor recognizes interest revenue under the effective interest method whereas the operating lease lessor recognizes straight-line lease revenue.

| Income Statement | Year 1 | Year 2 | Year 3 | Year 4 | Year 5 |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| Finance lease: |  |  |  |  |  |
| Interest revenue | 37,908 | 31,699 | 24,869 | 17,355 | 9,091 |
| Operating lease: |  |  |  |  |  |
| Lease revenue | 100,000 | 100,000 | 100,000 | 100,000 | 100,000 |

The statement of cash flows, however, is no different for the lessor under a finance or operating lease: The entire cash inflow from the lease payment is recognized under operating activities.

| Statement of Cash Flows | Year 1 | Year 2 | Year 3 | Year 4 | Year 5 |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| Finance lease: |  |  |  |  |  |
| Cash flows from operating activities | 100,000 | 100,000 | 100,000 | 100,000 | 100,000 |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |
| Operating lease: <br> Cash flows from operating activities | 100,000 | 100,000 | 100,000 | 100,000 | 100,000 |

# FINANCIAL REPORTING FOR POSTEMPLOYMENT AND SHARE-BASED COMPENSATION PLANS 

explain the financial reporting of defined contribution, defined benefit, and stock-based compensation plans

## Employee Compensation

Employee compensation packages are structured to achieve various objectives, including satisfying employees' needs for liquidity, retaining employees, and motivating employees. Common components of employee compensation are salary, bonuses, health and life insurance premiums, defined contribution and benefit pension plans, and share-based compensation. The amount of compensation and its composition are determined in labor markets, which vary significantly by the types of skills needed, geography, the stage of the business cycle, and labor laws and customs.

The salary component of compensation provides for the liquidity needs of an employee. Bonuses, generally in the form of cash, motivate and reward employees for short- or long-term performance or goal achievement by linking pay to performance. Non-monetary benefits, such as health and life insurance premiums, housing, and vehicles, may be provided to facilitate employees performing their jobs. Salary, bonuses, and non-monetary benefits tend to vest (i.e., employee earns the right to the consideration) immediately or shortly after their grant date. In terms of financial reporting, a company reports compensation expense on the income statement in the period in which compensation vests. Immediate or short-term vesting makes the accounting for salary, most non-monetary benefits, and bonuses straightforward: when the employee has earned the salary or bonus, an expense is recorded for the fair value of the compensation, and a cash outflow or accrued compensation liability (a current liability) is recognized. Expenses and cash outflows for short-term compensation tend to be well matched.

## Deferred Compensation

Deferred compensation vests over time and can provide valuable retirement savings and financial upside to employees and often serve as an effective retention and stakeholder alignment tool for employers. The financial reporting for deferred compensation plans is generally more complex than that for compensation that vests immediately because of the difficulty in measurement and potential lags between employee service and cash outflows. Employees may earn compensation in the current period but receive consideration in future periods, and the amount of consideration can be based on factors such as their future salary or the employer's stock price. Management judgment and assumptions are required.

Pensions and other postemployment benefit plans are a common type of deferred compensation. Two common types of pension plans are defined contribution pension plans and defined benefit pension plans. Under a defined-contribution plan, a company contributes an agreed-upon amount into the plan, which may be structured as a match to employees' contributions into the plan (e.g., 50 percent of 5 percent of employees' contribution up to a certain limit). The company contribution is the pension expense and is reported as an operating cash outflow. The only impact on assets and liabilities is a decrease in cash, although if some portion of the agreed-upon amount has not been paid by fiscal year-end, an accrued compensation liability would be recognized on the balance sheet. Because the amount of the contribution is defined and the company has no further obligation once the contribution has been made, accounting for a defined-contribution plan is straightforward.

Companies may also offer other types of postemployment benefit plans, such as retiree healthcare plans. These plans also incur non-current liabilities for employers but tend to be far smaller than pension plans and are typically not funded in advance; thus, benefit payments are often expensed as incurred.

## Defined-Benefit Pension Plans

Under a defined-benefit pension plan, a company makes promises of future benefits to be paid to the employee during retirement. For example, a company could promise an employee annual pension payments equal to 70 percent of her final salary at retirement until death. Measuring the obligation arising from that promise requires the company to make many assumptions, such as the employee's expected salary at retirement and the number of years the employee is expected to live beyond retirement. The company estimates the future amounts to be paid and discounts the future estimated amounts to a present value (using a discount rate equal to the yield on a
high-quality corporate bond) to determine the pension obligation today. The discount rate and other assumptions used to determine the pension obligation significantly affects the size of the pension obligation.

Most defined-benefit pension plans are funded through assets held in a separate legal entity, typically a pension trust fund. A company makes payments into the pension fund and retirees are paid from the fund. The payments that a company makes into the fund are invested until they are needed to pay the retirees. If the fair value of the plan's assets is higher than the present value of the estimated pension obligation, the plan has a surplus and the company will report a net pension asset on its balance sheet. Conversely, if the present value of the estimated pension obligation exceeds the fair value of the fund's assets, the plan has a deficit and the company will report a net pension liability on its balance sheet.

## Accounting for Defined-Benefit Plans under IFRS

Under IFRS, the change in the net pension asset or liability each period is viewed as having three general components. Two of the components of this change are recognized as pension expense on the income statement: (1) employees' service costs, and (2) the net interest expense or income accrued on the beginning net pension asset or liability.

The service cost during the period for an employee is the present value of the increase in the pension benefit earned by the employee as a result of providing one more year of service. The service cost also includes any effects from changes in the plan, known as past service costs.

The net interest expense or income represents the change in the present value of the net defined benefit pension asset or liability from the passage of time (i.e., a liability would increase over time as payout dates near) and is calculated as the net pension asset or liability multiplied by the discount rate.

The third component of the change in the net pension asset or liability during a period (i.e., "remeasurements") is recognized in other comprehensive income. Remeasurements are not amortized into profit or loss over time. Remeasurements include (1) actuarial gains and losses and (2) the actual return on plan assets less any return included in the net interest expense or income. Actuarial gains and losses can occur when changes are made to the assumptions on which a company bases its estimated pension obligation (e.g., employee turnover, mortality rates, retirement ages, compensation increases). The actual return on plan assets includes interest, dividends, and other income derived from the plan assets, including realized and unrealized gains or losses. The actual return typically differs from the amount included in the net interest expense or income, which is calculated using a rate reflective of a high-quality corporate bond yield; plan assets are typically allocated across various asset classes, including equity as well as bonds.

## Accounting for Defined-Benefit Plan under US GAAP

Under US GAAP, the change in net pension asset or liability each period is viewed as having five components, some of which are recognized in profit and loss in the period incurred and some of which are recognized in other comprehensive income and amortized into profit and loss over time.

The three components recognized on the income statement in the period incurred are as follows:

1. employees' service costs for the period;
2. interest expense accrued on the beginning pension obligation; and
3. expected return on plan assets, which is a reduction in the amount of expense recognized.

The other two components are past service costs and actuarial gains and losses. Past service costs are recognized in other comprehensive income in the period in which they arise and then subsequently amortized into pension expense over the future service period of the employees covered by the plan. Actuarial gains and losses are typically also recognized in other comprehensive income in the period in which they occur and then amortized into pension expense over time. In effect, this treatment allows companies to "smooth" the effects on pension expense over time for these latter two components. US GAAP does permit companies to immediately recognize actuarial gains and losses in profit and loss.

Pension expense on the income statement is classified on a functional basis like other employee compensation expenses. For a manufacturing company, pension expense related to production employees is added to inventory and expensed through cost of sales (cost of goods sold). For other employees, the pension expense is included in selling, general, and administrative expenses. Therefore, pension expense is typically not directly reported on the income statement. Rather, extensive disclosures are included in the notes to the financial statements.

Exhibit 3 presents excerpts from the balance sheet and pension-related disclosures in BT Group plc's Annual Report for the year ended 31 March 2018. BT reports under IFRS.

Exhibit 3: BT Group plc: Excerpts from Balance Sheet and Pension-Related Disclosures

| Non-current liabilities, GBP millions | Mar. 31, 2018 | Mar. 31, 2017 | Mar. 31, 2016 |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| Loans and other borrowings | 11,994 | 10,081 | 11,025 |
| Derivative financial instruments | 787 | 869 | 863 |
| Retirement benefit obligations | 6,371 | 9,088 | 6,382 |
| Other payables | 1,326 | 1,298 | 1,106 |
| Deferred tax liabilities | 1,340 | 1,240 | 1,262 |
| Provisions | 452 | 536 | 565 |
| Non-current liabilities | 22,270 | 23,112 | 21,203 |

## Pension-Related Disclosures

The following are excerpts of pension-related disclosures from BT Group plc's 2018 Annual Report.

## Extract from Note 3 "Summary of Significant Accounting Policies"

## Retirement benefits

The group's net obligation in respect of defined benefit pension plans is the present value of the defined benefit obligation less the fair value of the plan assets.

The calculation of the obligation is performed by a qualified actuary using the projected unit credit method and key actuarial assumptions at the balance sheet date.

The income statement expense is allocated between an operating charge and net finance income or expense. The operating charge reflects the increase in the defined benefit obligation resulting from the pension benefit earned by active employees in the current period, the costs of administering
the plans and any past service costs/credits such as those arising from curtailments or settlements. The net finance income or expense reflects the interest on the net retirement benefit obligations recognised in the group balance sheet, based on the discount rate at the start of the year. Actuarial gains and losses are recognised in full in the period in which they occur and are presented in the group statement of comprehensive income.

The group also operates defined contribution pension plans and the income statement expense represents the contributions payable for the year.

Extract from Note 20 "Retirement Benefit Plans Information on Defined Benefit Pension Plans"

| GBP millions | 2018 | 2017 | 2016 |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| Present value of liabilities | 57,327 | 60,200 | 50,350 |
| Fair value of plan assets | 50,956 | 51,112 | 43,968 |

## EXAMPLE 5

## BT Group's Pension Plan

Use information in the excerpts in Exhibit 3 to answer the following questions:

1. What type(s) of pension plans does BT have?

## Solution:

Note 3 "Summary of Significant Accounting Policies" indicates that the company has both defined contribution and defined benefit pension plans.
2. What proportion of BT's total non-current liabilities are related to its retirement benefit obligations?

## Solution:

Retirement benefit obligations represent 29 percent, 39 percent, and 30 percent of BT's total non-current liabilities for the years 2018, 2017, and 2016. Using 2018 to illustrate, GBP6,371/GBP22,270 $=29 \%$. (GBP million)
3. Describe how BT's retirement benefit obligation is calculated.

## Solution:

Note 3 "Summary of Significant Accounting Policies" indicates that BT's Retirement benefit obligation is calculated as the present value of the defined benefit obligation minus the fair value of the plan assets.
Using data from Note 20 "Retirement Benefit Plans" the retirement benefit obligation for each year can be calculated. Using 2018 to illustrate, GBP57,327 - GBP50,956 = GBP6,371 (GBP million).

## Share-Based Compensation

Share-based compensation is intended to align employees' interests with those of the shareholders and is another common type of deferred compensation. Unlike pension plans, share-based compensation tends to be highly concentrated among more senior-level employees such as executives as well as directors. Both IFRS and

US GAAP require a company to disclose in their annual report key elements of management compensation. Regulators may require additional disclosure. The disclosures enable analysts to understand the nature and extent of compensation, including the share-based payment arrangements that existed during the reporting period. In the United States, these disclosures are typically provided in a company's proxy statement that is filed with the SEC. Exhibit 4 shows the disclosure of Apple Inc.'s 2021 Named Executive Officer Compensation:

## Exhibit 4: Apple Inc.'s 2021 Named Executive Officer Compensation

Our executive compensation program is designed to motivate and reward outstanding performance in a straightforward, consistent, and effective way, commensurate with Apple's size, performance, and profitability. The compensation of our named executive officers has three basic components: annual base salary, annual cash incentive, and long-term equity awards.

## Annual Base Salary

Base salary is a customary, fixed element of compensation intended to attract and retain executives. When setting the annual base salaries of our named executive officers, the Compensation Committee considers market data provided by its independent compensation consultant, internal pay equity, and Apple's financial performance and size relative to peer companies. The annual base salaries for our named executive officers did not change for 2021.

## Annual Cash Incentive

Our annual cash incentive program is a performance-based, at-risk component of our named executive officers' compensation. Variable payouts are designed to motivate our named executive officers to deliver strong annual financial results, while advancing Apple values and key community initiatives. The financial performance measures and payout opportunities under the annual incentive program did not change for 2021, although the design of the program was enhanced to include a modifier based on Apple values and key community initiatives ("ESG Modifier"), as described below.

## Long-Term Equity Awards

We pay for performance and manage Apple for the long-term. Consistent with this approach and our guiding compensation principles, the majority of our named executive officers' annual compensation is provided in the form of longterm equity incentives that emphasize long-term shareholder value creation and the retention of a strong executive leadership team through a balanced mix of performance-based and time-based RSU awards.

## Performance-Based RSUs

RSU awards with performance-based vesting are a substantial, at-risk component of our named executive officers' compensation tied to Apple's long-term performance. The number of performance-based RSUs that vest depends entirely on Apple's total shareholder return relative to the other companies in the S\&P 500 ("Relative TSR") for the applicable performance period. To earn a target award, Apple must achieve performance at the 55th percentile of the S\&P 500. The Compensation Committee chose Relative TSR as it continues to be an objective and meaningful metric to evaluate our performance against the performance of other large companies and to align the interests of our named executive officers with the interests of our shareholders in creating long-term value.

We measure Relative TSR for the applicable performance period based on the change in each company's stock price during that period, taking into account any dividends paid during that period, which are assumed to be reinvested in the stock. A 20-trading-day averaging period is used to determine the beginning and ending stock price values used to calculate the total shareholder return of Apple and the other companies in the S\&P 500. This averaging period mitigates the impact on the long-term Relative TSR results of one-day or short-term stock price fluctuations at the beginning or end of the performance period. The change in stock price value from the beginning to the end of the period is divided by the beginning stock price value to determine TSR.

## Time-Based RSUs

RSU awards with time-based vesting align the interests of our named executive officers with the interests of our shareholders by promoting the stability and retention of a high-performing executive team over the longer term. Vesting schedules for time-based awards are generally longer than typical peer company practices, as described below.

## Dividend Equivalents

All RSUs granted to our employees in 2021, including our named executive officers, have dividend equivalent rights. The dividend equivalents will only pay out if the time-based vesting and performance conditions have been met for the RSUs to which the dividend equivalents relate.
Source: Apple Inc's 2022 Proxy Statement Form DEF14A, filed 6 January 2022, p. 43.
Share-based compensation, in addition to theoretically aligning the interests of employees with shareholders, has the advantage of potentially requiring no cash outlay. However, share-based compensation is treated as an expense and thus as a reduction of earnings even when no cash changes hands. In addition to decreasing earnings through compensation expense, share-based compensation has the potential to dilute earnings per share. Share-based compensation arrangements can also be cash-settled, which can result in the accrual of a liability.

Although share-based compensation is generally viewed positively as it aligns managers' interests with those of the shareholders, there are several disadvantages. First is that issuing shares to employees dilutes existing shareholders. Second, the recipient may have limited influence over the company's market value (especially with respect to the performance of the broad stock market), so share-based compensation does not necessarily provide the desired incentives and may improperly reward or punish employee performance. Another disadvantage is that the increased ownership may lead managers to be risk averse. Fearing a large market value decline (and loss in individual wealth), shareholder managers may seek less risky (and less profitable) projects. An opposite effect, excessive risk taking, can also occur with the awarding of stock options. Options have skewed payouts that reward the upside while the downside is limited to zero; as a result, managers may seek high-risk, high-reward investments.

For financial reporting of share-based compensation plans, under both IFRS and US GAAP, companies generally estimate the fair value of the share-based compensation at the grant date and recognize it as compensation expense ratably over the plan's vesting schedule. Any changes in the employee's stock price after the grant date does not affect the financial reporting. Specifically, the financial reporting depends on the type of plan. Two common forms of equity-settled share-based compensation are stock grants and stock options.

## Stock Grants

A company can grant stock to employees outright, with restrictions, or contingent on performance. For an outright stock grant, compensation expense is reported on the basis of the fair value of the stock on the grant date-generally the market value at grant date. Compensation expense is allocated over the period benefited by the employee's service, referred to as the service period. The employee service period is presumed to be the current period unless there are some specific requirements, such as three years of future service, before the employee is vested (has the right to receive the compensation).

Another type of stock award is a restricted stock grant, which requires the employee to return ownership of those shares to the company if certain conditions are not met. Common restrictions include the requirements that employees remain with the company for a specified period or that certain performance goals are met. Compensation expense for restricted stock grants is measured as the fair value (usually market value) of the shares issued at the grant date. This compensation expense is allocated over the employee's service period.

Shares granted contingent on meeting performance goals are called performance shares. The amount of the grant is usually determined by performance measures other than the change in stock price, such as accounting earnings or return on assets. Basing the grant on accounting performance addresses employees' potential concerns that the stock price is beyond their control and thus should not form the basis for compensation. However, performance shares can potentially have the unintended impact of providing incentives to manipulate accounting numbers. Compensation expense is equal to the fair value (usually market value) of the shares issued at the grant date. This compensation expense is allocated over the employee service period.

Generally, companies have increased their use of stock grants, particularly restricted stock grants in the form of restricted stock units (RSUs), and have decreased their use of stock options to compensate employees over time. Stock grants benefit employees as they are valuable so long as the employer's stock price is greater than zero, while stock options can expire worthless if the employer's stock price does not exceed the exercise price.

## Stock Options

Like stock grants, compensation expense related to option grants is reported at fair value under both IFRS and US GAAP. Both require that fair value be estimated using an appropriate valuation model.

Whereas the fair value of stock grants is usually the market value at the date of the grant (adjusted for dividends prior to vesting), the fair value of option grants must be estimated. Companies cannot rely on market prices of options to measure the fair value of employee stock options because features of employee stock options typically differ from traded options. The choice of valuation or option pricing model is one of the critical elements in estimating fair value. Several models are commonly used, such as the Black-Scholes option pricing model or a binomial model. Accounting standards do not prescribe a particular model. Generally, though, the valuation method should (1) be consistent with fair value measurement, (2) be based on established principles of financial economic theory, and (3) reflect all substantive characteristics of the award.

Once a valuation model is selected, a company must determine the inputs to the model, typically including exercise price, stock price volatility, estimated life of each award, estimated number of options that will be forfeited, dividend yield, and the risk-free rate of interest. Some inputs, such as the exercise price, are known at the time of the grant. Other critical inputs are highly subjective-such as stock price volatility or the estimated life of stock options-and can greatly change the estimated
fair value and thus compensation expense. Higher volatility, a longer estimated life, and a higher risk-free interest rate increase the estimated fair value, whereas a higher assumed dividend yield decreases the estimated fair value. Combining different assumptions with alternative valuation models can significantly affect the fair value of employee stock options.

In Exhibit 5, an excerpt from GlaxoSmithKline, plc's 2021 Annual Report explains the assumptions and model used in valuing its stock options.

Exhibit 5: GlaxoSmithKline, plc's Assumptions and Model Used in Valuing Its Stock Option

## Share options and savings-related options

For the purposes of valuing savings-related options to arrive at the share-based payment charge, a Black-Scholes option pricing model has been used. The assumptions used in the model are as follows:

|  | 2021 Grant | 2020 Grant | 2019 Grant |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| Risk-free interest rate | 0.74\% | (0.07\%) | 0.44\% |
| Dividend yield | 3.8\% | 6.2\% | 4.5\% |
| Volatility | 27\% | 27\% | 22\% |
| Expected life | 3 years | 3 years | 3 years |
| Savings-related options grant price (including 20\% discount) | £12.07 | £10.34 | £14.15 |

Options outstanding

|  | Savings-related share options scheme |  |
| :--- | :--- | :--- |
|  | Number | Weighted exercise price |
| At 31 December 2021 | 7,165 | £11.58 |
| Range of exercise prices on options outstanding at year end |  | £10.34-14.15 |
| Weighted average market price on exercise during year |  | £13.30 |
| Weighted average remaining contractual life |  | 2.1 years |

Options over 1.9 million shares were granted during the year under the sav-ings-related share option scheme at a weighted average fair value of $£ 3.22$. At 31 December 2021, 5.3 million of the savings-related share options were not exercisable.

There has been no change in the effective exercise price of any outstanding options during the year.
Source: GSK, 2021 Annual Report, p. 246.

## Accounting for Stock Options

In accounting for stock options, the basic requirement is that the value of options granted to employees as compensation must be expensed ratably over the period that services are provided. Several important dates affect the accounting, including the grant date, the vesting date, the exercise date, and the expiration date. The grant date is the day that options are granted to employees. The service period is usually the period between the grant date and the vesting date.

The vesting date is the date that employees can first exercise the stock options. The vesting can be immediate or over a future period. If the share-based payments vest immediately (i.e., no further period of service is required), then expense is recognized on the grant date. If the share-based awards do not vest until a specified service period is completed, compensation expense is recognized and allocated over the service period. If the share-based awards are conditional upon the achievement of a performance condition or a market condition (i.e., a target share price), then compensation expense is recognized over the estimated service period. The exercise date is the date when employees exercise the options and convert them to stock. If the options go unexercised, they may expire at some predetermined future date, commonly 5 or 10 years from the grant date.

The grant date is also the date that compensation expense is measured if both the number of shares and the option price are known. If facts affecting the value of options granted depend on events after the grant date, then compensation expense is measured when those facts are known.

## EXAMPLE 6

## Disclosure of Stock Options' Current Compensation Expense, Vesting, and Future Compensation Expense

## Exhibit 6: Excerpts from Note 12—Stock Compensation Plans in the Notes to Financial Statements of Coca Cola, Inc.

Our Company grants long-term equity awards under its stock-based compensation plans to certain employees of the Company.

Total stock-based compensation expense was $\$ 337$ million, $\$ 141$ million and $\$ 201$ million in 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. In 2020, for certain employees who accepted voluntary separation from the Company as a result of our strategic realignment initiatives, the Company modified their outstanding equity awards granted prior to 2020 so that the employees

As of December 31, 2021, we had $\$ 335$ million of total unrecognized compensation cost related to nonvested stock-based compensation awards granted under our plans, which we expect to recognize over a weight-ed-average period of 1.9 years as stock-based compensation expense. This expected cost does not include the impact of any future stockbased compensation awards.
Source: Coca Cola, Inc. Form 10-K, filed 22 February 2022.

Using the information in Exhibit 6, from Coca Cola, Inc.'s Notes to Financial Statements, determine the following:

1. Total compensation expense relating to options already granted that will be recognized in future years as options vest.

## Solution:

Coca Cola, Inc. discloses that unrecognized compensation expense relating to stock options already granted, but not yet vested, totals USD335 million.
2. Approximate compensation expense in 2022 and 2023 relating to options already granted.

## Solution:

The options already granted will vest over the next 1.9 years. Compensation expense related to stock options already granted will be USD176 million (USD335/1.9 years) in 2022 and USD159 million in 2023 (USD335 total less USD176 expensed in 2022). New options granted in the future will likely raise the total reported compensation expense.

When an option is exercised, the market price of the option at the time of exercise is not relevant. The amount of expense is determined based on the fair value of the option at the grant date. The fair value amount is recognized as compensation expense over the vesting period.

The exercise of an option is accounted for in a similar way to the issuance of stock. Upon exercise, the company increases its cash for the exercise price of the option (paid by the option holder) and credits common stock for the par value of the stock issued. Additional paid-in capital is increased by the difference between the par value of the stock and the sum of the fair value of the option at the grant date and the cash received.

In sum, the key accounting requirements are as follows:

1. Recognize compensation expense based on the fair value of the award. Since no cash is exchanged upon the grant, the offsetting account for the compensation expense is additional paid in capital.
2. The grant date fair value is recognized as compensation expense over the vesting period.
3. Upon exercise, the company increases equity by the fair value of the options on the grant date plus the cash provided by the employee upon exercise.

As the option expense is recognized over the relevant vesting period, the impact on the financial statements is to ultimately reduce retained earnings (as with any other expense). The offsetting entry is an increase in paid-in capital. Thus, the recognition of option expense has no net impact on total equity.

## Other Types of Share-Based Compensation

Both stock grants and stock options allow the employee to obtain ownership in the company. Other types of share-based compensation, such as stock appreciation rights (SARs) or phantom stock, compensate an employee on the basis of changes in the value of shares without requiring the employee to hold the shares. These are referred to as cash-settled share-based compensation. With SARs, an employee's compensation is based on increases in a company's share price. Like other forms of share-based compensation, SARs serve to motivate employees and align their interests with shareholders. The following are two additional advantages of SARs:

- The potential for risk aversion is limited because employees have limited downside risk and unlimited upside potential similar to employee stock options.
- Shareholder ownership is not diluted.

Similar to other share-based compensation, SARs are valued at fair value and compensation expense is allocated over the service period of the employee. While phantom share plans are similar to other types of share-based compensation, they differ somewhat because compensation is based on the performance of hypothetical stock rather than the company's actual stock. Unlike SARs, phantom shares can be used by private companies or business units within a company that are not publicly traded or by highly illiquid companies.

## PRESENTATION AND DISCLOSURE

describe the financial statement presentation of and disclosures relating to long-term liabilities and share-based compensation

This lesson examines the presentation and disclosure requirements for leases, postretirement benefits, and share-based compensation. These disclosures are typically included as notes to the financial statements.

## Presentation and Disclosure of Leases

Both IFRS and US GAAP indicate that the objective of lease disclosure is to provide the user of the financial statement with information to assess the amount, timing and uncertainty of cash flows associated with leases.

The non-current portion of the balance sheet will typically contain a "right of use" asset and the non-current (long-term) liabilities section will typically show the lease liability. However, depending on the size of leased assets and lease obligations, some companies may not have discrete lease line items on the balance sheet and instead will report leases in "Other assets" or "Other liabilities." In addition to amounts reported on the balance sheet, both lessees and lessors must disclose quantitative and qualitative information about its leases, significant judgments made to comply with lease accounting requirements and the amounts recognized in the financial statements relating to those leases and their location on the statements.

## Lessee Disclosure

Specifically, as indicated in IFRS 16, lessee disclosures must include the following amounts for the current reporting period:

- the carrying amount of right of use assets and the end of the reporting period by class of underlying asset;
- total cash outflow for leases;
- interest expense on lease liabilities;
- depreciation charges for right-of-use assets by class of underlying asset; and
- additions to right of use assets.

In addition, lessees should disclose a maturity analysis of lease liabilities (separately from the maturity analysis of other financial liabilities like bonds and loans) and additional quantitative and qualitative information about leasing activity to enable users of financial statements to assess the nature of the lessee's leasing activities and future cash outflows. This analysis should include the following:

- the nature of the lessee's leasing activities;

