B. 16.5 percent.
C. 21.0 percent.

Solution:
B is correct. Taxes are calculated as: (USD1,000 $\times 21 \%)+($ USD1,000 $\times 12 \%)$ $=$ USD330; Effective tax rate $=$ USD330/USD2,000 $=16.5 \%$.
5. Assume on January 1 the following year, 20X2, Neutrino acquires company EFG, which is domiciled in South Korea. The statutory tax rate in South Korea is 25 percent. EFG earns USD500 in profits in 20X2. Assuming US and Ireland operations each increase pre-tax profits by 25 percent, the effective tax rate in 20X2 for the consolidated entity is closest to:
A. 6.5 percent.
B. 17.9 percent.
C. 22.0 percent.

Solution:
B is correct. The effective tax rate in 20X2 for the consolidated entity is calculated as follows:

| Country | Taxable Income | Statutory Rate | Taxes |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| United States | USD1,250 | 21\% | USD262.50 |
| Ireland | 1,250 | 12 | 150.00 |
| South Korea | 500 | 25 | 125.00 |
| Total | USD3,000 |  | 537.50 |
| Effective tax rate: |  | 537.50/3,000 | 17.9\% |

## PRESENTATION AND DISCLOSURE

analyze disclosures relating to deferred tax items and the effective tax rate reconciliation and explain how information included in these disclosures affects a company's financial statements and financial ratios

The Consolidated Statements of Operations (Income Statements) and Consolidated Balance Sheets for Micron Technology (MU), a global technology company based in the US, are provided in Exhibit 18 and Exhibit 19, respectively. Exhibit 18 provides the income tax note disclosures for MU for the 2015, 2016, and 2017 fiscal years.

MU's income tax provision (i.e., income tax expense) for fiscal year 2017 is USD114 million (see Exhibit 18). The income tax note disclosure in Exhibit 20 reconciles how the income tax provision was determined beginning with MU's reported income before taxes (shown in Exhibit 20 as USD5,196 million for fiscal year 2017). The note disclosure then denotes the income tax provision for 2017 that is current (USD153 million), which is then offset by the deferred tax benefit for foreign taxes (USD39 million), for a net income tax provision of USD114 million. Exhibit 20 further shows a reconciliation of how the income tax provision was derived from the US federal
statutory rate. Many public companies comply with this required disclosure by displaying the information in percentage terms, but MU has elected to provide the disclosure in absolute dollar amounts. From this knowledge, for 2017, we can see that the dollar amount shown for US federal income tax provision at the statutory rate (USD1,819 million) was determined by multiplying MU's income before taxes by the 35 percent US federal statutory rate (USD5, $196 \times 0.35=$ USD1,819).

In addition, the note disclosure in Exhibit 20 provides detailed information about the derivation of the deferred tax assets (USD766 million for 2017) and deferred tax liabilities (USD17 million for 2017). These deferred tax assets are shown separately on MU's consolidated balance sheet for fiscal year 2017 with noncurrent assets (see Exhibit 19), while the deferred tax liabilities are included in other noncurrent liabilities (also see Exhibit 19).

Exhibit 18: Micron Technology, Inc. Consolidated Statements of Operations (US dollar millions, except per share)

| For the Year Ended | 31 Aug. 2017 | 1 Sept. 2016 | 3 Sept. 2015 |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| Net sales | 20,322 | USD12,399 | USD16,192 |
| Cost of goods sold | 11,886 | 9,894 | 10,977 |
| Gross margin | 8,436 | 2,505 | 5,215 |
| Selling, general and administrative | 743 | 659 | 719 |
| Research and development | 1,824 | 1,617 | 1,540 |
| Restructure and asset impairments | 18 | 67 | 3 |
| Other operating (income) expense, net | (17) | (6) | (45) |
| Operating income | 5,868 | 168 | 2,998 |
| Interest income (expense), net | (560) | (395) | (336) |
| Other non-operating income (expense), net | (112) | (54) | (53) |
| Income tax (provision) benefit | (114) | (19) | (157) |
| Equity in net income (loss) of equity method investees | 8 | 25 | 447 |
| Net income (loss) attributable to noncontrolling interests | (1) | (1) | - |
| Net income (loss) attributable to Micron | USD5,089 | USD(276) | USD2,899 |
| Earnings (loss) per share: |  |  |  |
| Basic | USD4.67 | USD(0.27) | USD2.71 |
| Diluted | USD4.41 | USD(0.27) | USD2.47 |
| Number of shares used in per share calculations: |  |  |  |
| Basic | 1,089 | 1,036 | 1,070 |
| Diluted | 1,154 | 1,036 | 1,170 |

Exhibit 19: Micron Technology, Inc. Consolidated Balance Sheets (US dollar millions)

| As of | 31 Aug. 2017 | 1 Sept. 2016 |
| :--- | :--- | :--- |
| Assets |  |  |
| Cash and equivalents | USD5,109 | USD4,140 |
| Short-term investments | 319 | 258 |
| Receivables | 3,759 | 2,068 |
| Inventories | 3,123 | 2,889 |
| Other current assets | 147 | 140 |
| Total current assets | 12,457 | 9,495 |
| Long-term marketable investments | 617 | 414 |
| Property, plant and equipment, net | 19,431 | 14,686 |
| Equity method investments | 16 | 1,364 |
| Intangible assets, net | 387 | 464 |
| Deferred tax assets | 766 | 657 |
| Other noncurrent assets | 1,662 | 460 |
| Total assets | USD35,336 | USD27,540 |
| Liabilities and shareholders' equity |  |  |
| Accounts payable and accrued expenses | USD3,664 | USD3,879 |
| Deferred income | 408 | 200 |
| Current debt | 1,262 | 756 |
| Total current liabilities | 5,334 | 4,835 |
| Long-term debt | 9,872 | 9,154 |
| Other noncurrent liabilities | 639 | 623 |
| Total liabilities | 15,845 | 14,612 |
| Redeemable convertible notes | 21 | - |
| Micron shareholder's equity |  |  |
| Common stock of USD0.10 par value, 3,000 shares authorized, 1,116 shares issued and 1,112 shares outstanding (1,094 issued and 1,040 outstanding as of September 1, 2016) | 112 | 109 |
| Additional capital | 8,287 | 7,736 |
| Retained earnings | 10,260 | 5,299 |
| Treasury stock, 4 shares held (54 as of 1 September 2016) | (67) | $(1,029)$ |
| Accumulated other comprehensive income (loss) | 29 | (35) |
| Total Micron shareholders' equity | 18,621 | 12,080 |
| Noncontrolling interests in subsidiaries | 849 | 848 |
| Total equity | 19,470 | 12,928 |
| Total liabilities and shareholders' equity | 35,336 | USD27,540 |

## Exhibit 20: Micron Technology, Inc. Income Taxes Note to the Consolidated Financial Statements

Income (loss) before taxes and the income tax (provision) benefit consisted of the following:

| (USD millions) | 2017 | 2016 | 2015 |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| Income (loss) before income taxes, net income (loss) attributable to noncontrolling interests, and equity in net income (loss) of equity method investees |  |  |  |
| Foreign | USD5,252 | (USD353) | USD2,431 |
| US | (56) | 72 | 178 |
|  | USD5,196 | (USD281) | USD2,609 |
| Income tax (provision) benefit: |  |  |  |
| Current: |  |  |  |
| Foreign | (USD152) | (USD27) | (USD93) |
| State | (1) | (1) | (1) |
| US federal | (153) | (28) | (88) |
| Deferred: |  |  |  |
| US federal | - | 39 | 15 |
| State | - | 2 | 1 |
| Foreign | 39 | (32) | (85) |
|  | 39 | 9 | (69) |
| Income tax (provision) | (USD114) | (USD19) | (USD157) |

The company's income tax (provision) computed using the US federal statutory rate and the company's income tax (provision) benefit is reconciled as shown in Exhibit 21:

Exhibit 21: Company Income Tax (US dollar millions)

|  | 2017 | 2016 | 2015 |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| US federal income tax (provision) benefit at statutory rate | (USD1,819) | USD98 | (USD913) |
| Foreign tax rate differential | 1,571 | (300) | 515 |
| Change in valuation allowance | 64 | 63 | 260 |
| Change in unrecognized tax benefits | 12 | 52 | (118) |
| Tax credits | 66 | 48 | 53 |
| Noncontrolling investment transactions | - | - | 57 |
| Other | (8) | 20 | (11) |
| Income tax (provision) benefit | (114) | (USD19) | (USD157) |

State taxes reflect investment tax credits of USD233 million at 31 August 2017. Deferred income taxes reflect the net tax effects of temporary differences between the bases of assets and liabilities for financial reporting and income tax purposes. The company's deferred tax assets and liabilities consist of the following as of the end of the periods shown in Exhibit 22:

## Exhibit 22: Deferred Tax Assets and Liabilities (US dollar millions)

|  | 2017 | 2016 |
| :--- | :--- | :--- |
| Deferred tax assets: |  |  |
| Net operating loss and tax credit carryforwards | USD3,426 | USD3,014 |
| Accrued salaries, wages, and benefits | 211 | 142 |
| Other accrued liabilities | 59 | 76 |
| Other | 86 | 65 |
| Gross deferred assets | 3,782 | 3,297 |
| Less valuation allowance | $(2,321)$ | $(2,107)$ |
| Deferred tax assets, net of valuation allowance | 1,461 | 1,190 |
| Deferred tax liabilities: |  |  |
| Debt discount | (145) | (170) |
| Property, plant, and equipment | (300) | (135) |
| Unremitted earnings on certain subsidiaries | (123) | (121) |
| Product and process technology | (85) | (81) |
| Other | (59) | (28) |
| Deferred tax liabilities | (712) | (535) |
| Net deferred tax assets | USD749 | USD655 |
| Reported as: |  |  |
| Current deferred tax assets (included in other current assets) | USD- | USD- |
| Deferred tax assets | 766 | 657 |
| Current deferred tax liabilities (included in accounts payable and accrued expenses) | - | - |
| Deferred tax liabilities (included in other noncurrent liabilities) | (17) | (2) |
| Net deferred tax assets | USD749 | USD655 |

The company has a valuation allowance against substantially all of its US net deferred tax assets. As of 31 August 2017, the company had aggregate US tax net operating loss carryforwards of USD3.88 billion and unused US tax credit carryforwards of USD416 million. The company also has unused state tax net operating loss carryforwards of USD1.95 billion and unused state tax credits of USD233 million. The net operating loss carryforwards and the tax credit carryforwards expire between 2018 to 2037.

The changes in valuation allowance of USD64 million and USD63 million in 2017 and 2016, respectively, are primarily a result of uncertainties of realizing certain US and foreign net operating losses and certain tax credit carryforwards.

Provision has been made for deferred taxes on undistributed earnings of non-US subsidiaries to the extent that dividend payments from such companies are expected to result in additional tax liability. Remaining undistributed earnings of USD12.91 billion as of 31 August 2017 have been indefinitely reinvested. Determination of the amount of unrecognized deferred tax liability on these unremitted earnings is not practicable.

## EXAMPLE 6

## Financial Analysis

Use the financial statement information and disclosures provided by MU in Exhibit 18-Exhibit 20 to answer the following questions:

1. MU discloses a valuation allowance of USD2,321 million (see Exhibit 20) against gross deferred assets of USD3,782 million in 2017. Does the existence of this valuation allowance have any implications concerning MU's future earnings prospects?

## Solution:

According to Exhibit 20, MU's deferred tax assets expire gradually until 2037 (2018 to 2037 for the net operating loss carryforwards and the tax credit carryforwards).
Because the company is still relatively young, it is likely that most of these expirations occur toward the end of that period. Because cumulative US tax net operating loss carryforwards total USD3.88 billion, the valuation allowance could imply that MU is not reasonably expected to earn USD3.88 billion over the next 20 years. However, as we can see in Exhibit 18, MU earned a profit for 2017 and 2015, thereby showing that the allowance could be adjusted downward if the company continues to generate profits in the future and making it more likely than not that the deferred tax asset would be recognized.
2. How would MU's deferred tax assets and deferred tax liabilities be affected if the federal statutory tax rate was changed to 21 percent?

## Solution:

MU's total deferred tax assets exceed total deferred tax liabilities by USD749 million. A change in the federal statutory tax rate to 21 percent from the current rate of 35 percent would make these net deferred assets less valuable. Also, because it is possible that the deferred tax asset valuation allowance could be adjusted downward in the future (see discussion to solution 1 ), the impact could be far greater in magnitude.
3. How would reported earnings have been affected if MU were not using a valuation allowance?

## Solution:

The disclosure in Exhibit 20 shows that the increase in the valuation allowance increased the income tax provision as reported on the income statement by USD64 million in 2017. Additional potential reductions in the valuation allowance could similarly reduce reported income taxes (actual income taxes would not be affected by a valuation allowance established for financial reporting) in future years (see discussion to solution 1).
4. How would MU's USD3.88 billion in net operating loss carryforwards in 2017 (see Exhibit 20) affect the valuation that an acquiring company would be willing to offer?

## Solution:

If an acquiring company is profitable, it may be able to use MU's tax loss carryforwards to offset its own tax liabilities. The value to an acquirer would be the present value of the carryforwards, based on the acquirer's tax rate and expected timing of realization. The higher the acquiring company's tax rate, and the more profitable the acquirer, the sooner it would be able to benefit. Therefore, an acquirer with a high current tax rate would theoretically be willing to pay more than an acquirer with a lower tax rate.
5. Under what circumstances should the analyst consider MU's deferred tax liability as debt or as equity? Under what circumstances should the analyst exclude MU's deferred tax liability from both debt and equity when calculating the debt-to-equity ratio?

## Solution:

The analyst should classify the deferred tax liability as debt if the liability is expected to reverse with subsequent tax payment. If the liability is not expected to reverse, there is no expectation of a cash outflow and the liability should be treated as equity. By way of example, future company losses may preclude the payment of any income taxes, or changes in tax laws could result in taxes that are never paid. The deferred tax liability should be excluded from both debt and equity when both the amounts and timing of tax payments resulting from the reversals of temporary differences are uncertain.

## QUESTION SET

1. Deferred tax liabilities should be treated as equity when:
A. they are not expected to reverse.
B. the timing of tax payments is uncertain.
C. the amount of tax payments is uncertain.

## Solution:

A is correct. If the liability will not reverse, there will be no required tax payment in the future and the "liability" should be treated as equity.
2. When both the timing and amount of tax payments are uncertain, analysts should treat deferred tax liabilities as:
A. equity.
B. liabilities.
C. neither liabilities nor equity.

## Solution:

C is correct. The deferred tax liability should be excluded from both debt and equity when both the amounts and timing of tax payments resulting from the reversals of temporary differences are uncertain.

Note I: Income Taxes
The components of earnings before income taxes are shown in Exhibit 23:

## Exhibit 23: Earnings before Income Taxes (US dollar thousands)

|  | Year 3 | Year 2 | Year 1 |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| Earnings before income taxes: |  |  |  |
| United States | USD88,157 | USD75,658 | USD59,973 |
| Foreign | 116,704 | 113,509 | 94,760 |
| Total | USD204,861 | USD189,167 | USD154,733 |

The components of the provision for income taxes are shown in Exhibit 24:

## Exhibit 24: Provision for Income Taxes (US dollar thousands)

|  | Year 3 | Year 2 | Year 1 |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| Income taxes |  |  |  |
| Current: |  |  |  |
| Federal | USD30,632 | USD22,031 | USD18,959 |
| Foreign | 28,140 | 27,961 | 22,263 |
|  | USD58,772 | USD49,992 | USD41,222 |
| Deferred: |  |  |  |
| Federal | (USD4,752) | USD5,138 | USD2,336 |
| Foreign | 124 | 1,730 | 621 |
|  | $(4,628)$ | 6,868 | 2,957 |
| Total | USD54,144 | USD56,860 | USD44,179 |

3. In Year 3, the company's US GAAP income statement recorded a provision for income taxes closest to:
A. USD30,632.
B. USD54,144.
C. USD58,772.

## Solution:

B is correct. The income tax provision in Year 3 was USD54,144, consisting of USD58,772 in current income taxes, of which USD4,628 were deferred.
4. The company's effective tax rate was highest in:
A. Year 1.
B. Year 2.
C. Year 3 .

## Solution:

B is correct. The effective tax rate of 30.1 percent (USD56,860/USD189,167) was higher than the effective rates in Year 1 and Year 3.
5. Relative to the company's effective tax rate on US income, the company's effective tax rate on foreign income was:
A. lower in each year presented.
B. higher in each year presented.
C. higher in some periods and lower in others.

## Solution:

A is correct. In Year 3 the effective tax rate on foreign operations was 24.2 percent [(USD28,140 + USD124)/USD116,704], and the effective US tax rate was [(USD30,632 - USD4,752)/USD88,157] = 29.4 percent. In Year 2 the effective tax rate on foreign operations was 26.2 percent, and the US rate was 35.9 percent. In Year 1 the foreign rate was 24.1 percent, and the US rate was 35.5 percent.

A company's provision for income taxes resulted in effective tax rates attributable to loss from continuing operations before cumulative effect of change in accounting principles that varied from the statutory federal income tax rate of 34 percent, as summarized in Exhibit 25.

## Exhibit 25: Effective Tax Rates

| Year Ended 30 June | Year 3 | Year 2 | Year 1 |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| Expected federal income tax expense (benefit) from continuing operations at 34 percent | (USD112,000) | USD768,000 | USD685,000 |
| Expenses not deductible for income tax purposes | 357,000 | 32,000 | 51,000 |
| State income taxes, net of federal benefit | 132,000 | 22,000 | 100,000 |
| Change in valuation allowance for deferred tax assets | $(150,000)$ | $(766,000)$ | $(754,000)$ |
| Income tax expense | USD227,000 | USD56,000 | USD82,000 |

6. In Year 3, the company's net income (loss) was closest to:
A. (USD217,000).
B. (USD329,000).
C. (USD556,000).

## Solution:

C is correct. The income tax provision at the statutory rate of 34 percent is a benefit of USD112,000, suggesting that the pre-tax income was a loss of USD112,000/0.34 = (USD329,412). The income tax provision was USD227,000. (USD329,412) - USD227,000 = (USD556,412).
7. The USD357,000 adjustment in Year 3 most likely resulted in:
A. an increase in deferred tax assets.
B. an increase in deferred tax liabilities.
C. no change to deferred tax assets and liabilities.

## Solution:

C is correct. Accounting expenses that are not deductible for tax purposes result in a permanent difference, and thus do not give rise to deferred taxes.
8. Over the three years presented, changes in the valuation allowance for deferred tax assets were most likely indicative of:
A. decreased prospect for future profitability.
B. increased prospects for future profitability.
C. assets being carried at a higher value than their tax base.

## Solution:

B is correct. Over the three-year period, changes in the valuation allowance reduced cumulative income taxes by USD1,670,000. The reductions to the valuation allowance were a result of the company being "more likely than not" to earn sufficient taxable income to offset the deferred tax assets.

