## DIFFERENCES BETWEEN ACCOUNTING PROFIT AND TAXABLE INCOME

A company's accounting profit is reported on its income statement in accordance with prevailing accounting standards. Accounting profit (also referred to as income before taxes or pretax income) does not include a provision for income tax expense. ${ }^{1}$ A company's taxable income is its income subject to income taxes under the tax laws of the relevant jurisdiction. A company's taxable income is the basis for its income tax payable (a liability) or recoverable (an asset), which appears on its balance sheet. Income tax paid in a period is the cash amount paid for income and reduces the income tax payable.

The tax base of an asset or liability is the amount at which the asset or liability is valued for tax purposes, whereas the carrying amount is the amount at which the asset or liability is recorded in the financial statements. ${ }^{2}$ The tax bases and carrying amounts of assets and liabilities can differ based on differences in accounting standards and the relevant tax laws. Common differences are as follows:

- Revenues and expenses may be recognized in one period for accounting purposes and a different period for tax purposes.
- Specific revenues and expenses may be either recognized for accounting purposes and not at all for tax purposes, or vice versa.
- The deductibility of gains and losses of assets and liabilities may vary for accounting and income tax purposes.
- Subject to tax rules, tax losses in prior years might be used to reduce taxable income in later years, resulting in differences in accounting and taxable income (tax loss carryforward).
- Adjustments of reported financial data from prior years might not be recognized equally for accounting and tax purposes or might be recognized in different periods.

A common example is accelerated depreciation of an asset for tax reporting (to increase expense and lower tax payments in the early years) while using the straight-line depreciation method on the financial statements. Although different on a year-to-year basis (e.g., depreciation of 10 percent on a straight-line basis may be used for accounting purposes, whereas 50 percent might be allowed for tax purposes in the first year) both approaches allow for the total cost of the asset to be depreciated over its useful life.

Differences between the tax base and carrying amount of liabilities (and, by extension, between taxable income and accounting profit) can either be temporary or permanent. Temporary differences, like the aforementioned accelerated versus straight-line depreciation example, reverse in future periods, whereas permanent differences do not.

[^0]
## Taxable Temporary Differences

Temporary differences are further divided into two categories, namely taxable temporary differences and deductible temporary differences. Taxable temporary differences result from the carrying amount of an asset exceeding its tax base (like the aforementioned accelerated depreciation example at the end of Year 1) or when the tax base of a liability exceeds its carrying amount. Taxable temporary differences result in the recognition of deferred tax liabilities.

## Deductible Temporary Differences

Deductible temporary differences are temporary differences that result in a reduction or deduction of taxable income in a future period when the balance sheet item is recovered or settled. Deductible temporary differences result in a deferred tax asset when the tax base of an asset exceeds its carrying amount and, in the case of a liability, when the carrying amount of the liability exceeds its tax base. The recognition of a deferred tax asset is allowed only to the extent there is a reasonable expectation of future profits against which the asset or liability (that gave rise to the deferred tax asset) can be recovered or settled.

To determine the probability of sufficient future profits for utilization, one must consider the following: (1) sufficient taxable temporary differences must exist that are related to the same tax authority and the same taxable entity; and (2) the taxable temporary differences that are expected to reverse in the same periods as expected for the reversal of the deductible temporary differences.

## Taxable and Deductible Temporary Differences

Exhibit 1 summarizes how differences between the tax bases and carrying amounts of assets and liabilities give rise to deferred tax assets or deferred tax liabilities.

Exhibit 1: Treatment of Temporary Differences

| Balance Sheet Item | Carrying Amount vs. Tax Base | Results in Deferred Tax Asset/Liability |
| :--- | :--- | :--- |
| Asset | Carrying amount > tax base | Deferred tax liability |
| Asset | Carrying amount < tax base | Deferred tax asset |
| Liability | Carrying amount > tax base | Deferred tax asset |
| Liability | Carrying amount < tax base | Deferred tax liability |

Example 1 and 2 illustrate the difference in the tax base and carrying amount of the assets and liabilities, whether they are temporary or permanent differences, and whether a deferred tax asset or liability will be recognized.

## EXAMPLE 1

## Differences in Tax Base and Carrying Amount of Assets and Liabilities

Exhibit 2: Tax Base and Carrying Amounts

|  | Carrying Amount (euros) | Tax Base (euros) | Temporary Difference (euros) | Will Result in Deferred Tax Asset/Liability |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| 1. Dividends receivable | 1,000,000 | 1,000,000 | 0 | N/A |
| 2. Development costs | 2,500,000 | 2,250,000 | 250,000 | Deferred tax liability |
| 3. Research costs | 0 | 375,000 | $(375,000)$ | Deferred tax asset |
| 4. Accounts receivable | 1,500,000 | 1,218,750 | 281,250 | Deferred tax liability |

1. Dividends receivable: As a result of non-taxability, the carrying amount equals the tax base of dividends receivable. This constitutes a permanent difference and will not result in the recognition of any deferred tax asset or liability. A temporary difference constitutes a difference that will, at some future date, be reversed. Although the timing of recognition is different for tax and accounting purposes, in the end the full carrying amount will be expensed/recognized as income. A permanent difference will never be reversed. Based on tax legislation, dividends from a subsidiary are not recognized as income. Therefore, no amount will be reflected as dividend income when calculating the taxable income, and the tax base of dividends receivable must be the total amount received, namely EUR1,000,000. The taxable income and accounting profit will permanently differ with the amount of dividends receivable, even on future financial statements as an effect on the retained earnings reflected on the balance sheet.
2. Development costs: The difference between the carrying amount and tax base is a temporary difference that, in the future, will reverse. In this fiscal year, it will result in a deferred tax liability.
3. Research costs: The difference between the carrying amount and tax base is a temporary difference that results in a deferred tax asset. Remember that a deferred tax asset arises because of an excess amount paid for taxes (when taxable income is greater than accounting profit), which is expected to be recovered from future operations. Based on accounting principles, the full amount was deducted resulting in a lower accounting profit, while the taxable income by implication, should be greater because of the lower amount expensed.
4. Accounts receivable: The difference between the carrying amount and tax base of the asset is a temporary difference that will result in a deferred tax liability.

## EXAMPLE 2

## Differences in Tax Base and Carrying Amount of Assets and Liabilities

Exhibit 3: Tax Base and Carrying Amounts

|  | Carrying Amount (euros) | Tax Base (euros) | Temporary Difference (euros) | Will Result in Deferred Tax Asset/ Liability |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| 1. Donations | 0 | 0 | 0 | N/A |
| 2. Interest received in advance | 300,000 | 0 | $(300,000)$ | Deferred tax asset |
| 3. Rent received in advance | 10,000,000 | 0 | (10,000,000) | Deferred tax asset |
| 4. Loan (capital) | 550,000 | 550,000 | 0 | N/A |
| 4. Interest paid | 0 | 0 | 0 | N/A |

1. Donations: It was assumed that tax legislation does not allow donations to be deducted for tax purposes. No temporary difference results from donations, and thus a deferred tax asset or liability will not be recognized. This constitutes a permanent difference.
2. Interest received in advance: Interest received in advance results in a temporary difference that gives rise to a deferred tax asset. A deferred tax asset arises because of an excess amount paid for taxes (when taxable income is greater than accounting profit), which is expected to be recovered from future operations.
3. Rent received in advance: The difference between the carrying amount and tax base is a temporary difference that leads to the recognition of a deferred tax asset.
4. Loan: There are no temporary differences, as a result of the loan or interest paid, and thus no deferred tax item is recognized.

## Permanent Differences

Permanent differences are differences between tax laws and accounting standards that will not be reversed at some future date. Because they will not be reversed at a future date, these differences do not give rise to deferred tax. These items typically include the following:

- income or expense items not allowed by tax legislation, such as penalties and fines that are considered expenses for financial reporting purposes, but are not deductible for tax purposes; and
- tax credits for some expenditures that directly reduce taxes. An example is tax credits provided by tax authorities to encourage the purchase of solar power or an electric vehicle.

Because no deferred tax item is created for permanent differences, all permanent differences result in a difference between the company's tax rate and its statutory corporate income tax rate.

## Tax Expense

A company's tax expense or its provision for income taxes, appears on its income statement and is an aggregate of its income tax payable (or recoverable in the case of a tax benefit) and any changes in deferred tax assets and liabilities. This approach, rather than simply reporting income taxes paid, follows the matching principle by reporting the tax consequences of all current period activities.

## QUESTION SET

1. When accounting standards require recognition of an expense that is not permitted under tax laws, the result is a:
A. deferred tax liability.
B. temporary difference.
C. permanent difference.

## Solution:

C is correct. Accounting items that are not deductible for tax purposes will not be reversed and thus result in permanent differences.
2. When certain expenditures result in tax credits that directly reduce taxes, the company will most likely record:
A. a deferred tax asset.
B. a deferred tax liability.
C. no deferred tax asset or liability.

## Solution:

C is correct. Tax credits that directly reduce taxes are a permanent difference, and permanent differences do not give rise to deferred tax.
3. In early 2018, Sanborn Company must pay the tax authority EUR37,000 on the income it earned in 2017. This amount was most likely recorded on the company's 31 December 2017 financial statements as:
A. taxes payable.
B. income tax expense.
C. a deferred tax liability.

## Solution:

A is correct. The taxes a company must pay in the immediate future are taxes payable.

## DEFERRED TAX ASSETS AND LIABILITIES

explain how deferred tax liabilities and assets are created and the factors that determine how a company's deferred tax liabilities and assets should be treated for the purposes of financial analysis


[^0]:    1 As defined under International Accounting Standard 12 (IAS 12), paragraph 5.
    2 The terms "tax base" and "tax basis" are interchangeable. "Tax basis" is more commonly used in the United States. Similarly, "carrying amount" and "book value" refer to the same concept.

