| Financial Sector Ratios | Numerator | Denominator |
| :--- | :--- | :--- |
| Liquid asset requirement | Approved "readily marketable" securities | Specified deposit liabilities |
| Net interest margin | Net interest income | Total interest-earning assets |
| Retail Ratios | Numerator | Denominator |
| Same (or comparable) store sales | Average revenue growth year over year for stores open in both periods | Not applicable |
| Sales per square meter (or square foot) | Revenue | Total retail space in square meters (or square feet) |
| Service Companies | Numerator | Denominator |
| Revenue per employee | Revenue | Total number of employees |
| Net income per employee | Net income | Total number of employees |
| Hotel | Numerator | Denominator |
| Average daily rate | Room revenue | Number of rooms sold |
| Occupancy rate | Number of rooms sold | Number of rooms available |
| Subscription or Relationship-Based Businesses | Numerator | Denominator |
| Average revenue per user (ARPU) | Revenue | Average number of subscribers or users |

Note: Many other industry-specific ratios are outside the scope of this module. Resources such as Standard and Poor's Industry Surveys present useful ratios for each industry. Industry organizations may present useful ratios for the industry or a task specific to the industry.

## MODEL BUILDING AND FORECASTING

describe how ratio analysis and other techniques can be used to model and forecast earnings

Analysts often need to forecast future financial performance. For example, analysts' EPS forecasts and related equity valuations are widely followed by Wall Street. Analysts use data about the economy, industry, and company in arriving at a company's forecast. The results of an analyst's financial analysis, including common-size and ratio analyses, are integral to this process, along with the judgment of the analysts.

Based upon forecasts of growth and expected relationships among the financial statement data, the analyst can build a model to forecast future performance, which will be covered in later modules. In addition to budgets, pro forma financial statements are widely used in financial forecasting within companies, especially for use by senior executives and boards of directors. Last but not least, these budgets and forecasts are also used in presentations to credit analysts and others in obtaining external financing.

For example, based on a revenue forecast, an analyst may budget expenses based on expected common-size data. Forecasts of balance sheet and cash flow statements can be derived from expected ratio data, such as DSO. Forecasts are not limited to a single point estimate but should involve a range of possibilities. This can involve several techniques:

- Sensitivity analysis: Also known as "what if" analysis, sensitivity analysis shows the range of possible outcomes as specific assumptions are changed; this could, in turn, influence financing needs or investment in fixed assets.
- Scenario analysis: This type of analysis shows the changes in key financial quantities that result from given (economic) events, such as the loss of customers, the loss of a supply source, or a catastrophic event. If the list of events is mutually exclusive and exhaustive and the events can be assigned probabilities, the analyst can evaluate not only the range of outcomes but also standard statistical measures such as the mean and median value for various quantities of interest.
- Simulation: This is computer-generated sensitivity or scenario analysis based on probability models for the factors that drive outcomes. Each event or possible outcome is assigned a probability. Multiple scenarios are then run using the probability factors assigned to the possible values of a variable to determine an expected outcome for that variable.

