- Companies may have several different lines of business. This will cause aggregate financial ratios to be distorted. It is better to examine indus-try-specific ratios by lines of business.
- Differences in business model and corporate strategies can affect certain financial ratios.
- Some ratios are industry specific, and not all ratios are important to all industries.
- Differences in accounting methods used by companies can distort financial ratios.

4. Company goals and strategy. Actual ratios can be compared with company objectives to determine whether objectives are being attained and whether the results are consistent with the company's strategy.
5. Economic conditions. For cyclical companies, financial ratios tend to improve when the economy is strong and weaken during recessions. Therefore, financial ratios should be examined in light of the current phase of the business cycle.

The following lessons discuss the calculation and interpretation of activity, liquidity, solvency, and profitability ratios using a company's financial statements.

## ACTIVITY RATIOS

calculate and interpret activity, liquidity, solvency, and profitability ratios

Activity ratios, also known as asset utilization ratios or operating efficiency ratios, are measures of operational performance-how effectively the company is using working capital and longer term assets. Since working capital efficiency has a direct impact on liquidity, some activity ratios are also useful in assessing liquidity.

## Calculation of Activity Ratios

Exhibit 17 presents commonly used activity ratios.

Exhibit 17: Definitions of Commonly Used Activity Ratios

| Activity Ratios | Numerator | Denominator |
| :--- | :--- | :--- |
| Inventory turnover | Cost of sales or cost of goods sold | Average inventory |
| Days of inventory on hand (DOH) | Number of days in period | Inventory turnover |
| Receivables turnover | Revenue | Average receivables |
| Days of sales outstanding (DSO) | Number of days in period | Receivables turnover |
| Payables turnover | Cost of sales or cost of goods sold | Average trade payables |
| Number of days of payables | Number of days in period | Payables turnover |


| Activity Ratios | Numerator | Denominator |
| :--- | :--- | :--- |
| Working capital turnover | Revenue | Average working capital |
| Fixed asset turnover | Revenue | Average net fixed assets |
| Total asset turnover | Revenue | Average total assets |

Activity ratios generally combine information from the income statement in the numerator with balance sheet items in the denominator. Because the income statement measures what happened during a period, whereas the balance sheet shows the condition only at the end of the period, average balance sheet figures are normally used for consistency.

Activity ratios can be computed for any annual or interim period, but care must be taken in the interpretation and comparison across periods. For example, if the same company had cost of goods sold for the first quarter (90 days) of the following year of EUR35,000 and average inventory of EUR11,000, the inventory turnover would be 3.18 times. However, this turnover rate is 3.18 times per quarter, which is not directly comparable to the 12 times per year in the preceding year. In this case, we can annualize the quarterly inventory turnover rate by multiplying the quarterly turnover by 4 ( 12 months/ 3 months; or by 4.06 , using 365 days/ 90 days) for comparison to the annual turnover rate. So, the quarterly inventory turnover is equivalent to a 12.72 annual inventory turnover (or 12.90 if we annualize the ratio using a 90-day quarter and a 365-day year). To compute the DOH using quarterly data, we can use the quarterly turnover rate and the number of days in the quarter for the numerator-or, we can use the annualized turnover rate and 365 days; either results in DOH of around 28.3, with slight differences due to rounding ( $90 / 3.18=28.30$ and $365 / 12.90=28.29$ ). Another time-related computational detail is that for companies using a $52 / 53$-week annual period and for leap years, the actual days in the year should be used rather than 365.

In some cases, an analyst may want to know how many days of inventory are on hand at the end of the year rather than the average for the year. In this case, it would be appropriate to use the year-end inventory balance in the computation rather than the average. If the company is growing rapidly or if costs are increasing rapidly, analysts should consider using cost of goods sold just for the fourth quarter in this computation because the cost of goods sold of earlier quarters may not be relevant. Example 6 further demonstrates computation of activity ratios using Hong Kong Stock Exchange (HKEX)-listed Lenovo Group Limited.

## EXAMPLE 6

## Computation of Activity Ratios

1. An analyst would like to evaluate Lenovo Group's efficiency in collecting its trade accounts receivable during the fiscal year ended 31 March 2018 (FY2017). The analyst gathers the following information in Exhibit 18 from Lenovo's annual and interim reports:

Exhibit 18: Lenovo

|  | US dollar thousands |
| :--- | :--- |
| Trade receivables as of 31 March 2017 | 4,468,392 |
| Trade receivables as of 31 March 2018 | 4,972,722 |
| Revenue for year ended 31 March 2018 | 45,349,943 |

Calculate Lenovo's receivables turnover and number of days of sales outstanding (DSO) for the fiscal year ended 31 March 2018.
Solution:

| Receivables turnover | = |
| :--- | :--- |
| $=45,349,943 /[(4,468,392+4,972,722) / 2]$ <br> $=45,349,943 / 4,720,557$ <br> $=9.6069$ times, or 9.6 rounded <br> $=$ Number of days in period/Receivables turnover <br> $=365 / 9.6$ <br> $=38.0$ days |  |

On average, it took Lenovo 38 days to collect receivables during the fiscal year ended 31 March 2018.

## Interpretation of Activity Ratios

## Inventory Turnover and DOH

Inventory turnover indicates the resources tied up in inventory (i.e., the carrying costs) and, therefore, can be used to indicate inventory management effectiveness. In general, inventory turnover and DOH (days of inventory on hand) should be benchmarked against industry norms.

A high inventory turnover ratio relative to industry norms might indicate highly effective inventory management. Alternatively, a high inventory turnover ratio (and commensurately low DOH) could possibly indicate the company does not carry adequate inventory, so shortages could potentially hurt revenue. To assess which explanation is more likely, the analyst can compare the company's revenue growth with that of the industry. Slower growth combined with higher inventory turnover could indicate inadequate inventory levels. Revenue growth at or above the industry's growth supports the interpretation that the higher turnover reflects greater inventory management efficiency.

A low inventory turnover ratio (and commensurately high DOH) relative to the rest of the industry could be an indicator of slow-moving inventory, perhaps because of technological obsolescence or a change in fashion. Again, comparing the company's sales growth with the industry can offer insight.

## Receivables Turnover and DSO

The number of DSO (days of sales outstanding) reflects how fast the company collects cash from customers to whom it offers credit. Although limiting the numerator to sales made on credit in the receivables turnover would be more appropriate, credit sales information is usually not available to analysts; therefore, revenue as reported in the income statement is generally used.

As with inventory management, comparison of the company's sales growth relative to the industry can help the analyst assess whether sales are being lost due to stringent credit policies. In addition, comparing the company's estimates of uncollectible accounts receivable and actual credit losses with past experience and with peer companies can help assess whether low turnover reflects credit management issues. Companies often provide details of receivables aging (how much receivables have been outstanding by age). This can be used along with DSO to understand trends in collection, as demonstrated in Example 7.

## EXAMPLE 7

## Evaluation of an Activity Ratio

An analyst has computed the average DSO for Lenovo for fiscal years ended 31 March 2018 and 2017:

Exhibit 19: Average DSO

|  | FY2017 | FY2016 |
| :--- | :---: | :---: |
| Days of sales outstanding | 38.0 | 37.6 |

Revenue increased from USD43.035 billion for fiscal year ended 31 March 2017 (FY2016) to USD45.350 billion for fiscal year ended 31 March 2018 (FY2017). The analyst would like to better understand the change in the company's DSO from FY2016 to FY2017 and whether the increase is indicative of any issues with the customers' credit quality. The analyst collects accounts receivable aging information from Lenovo's annual reports and computes the percentage of accounts receivable by days outstanding. This information is presented in Exhibit 20:

Exhibit 20: Accounts Receivable

|  | FY2017 |  | FY2016 |  | FY2015 |  |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
|  | USD000 | Percent | USD000 | Percent | USD000 | Percent |
| Accounts receivable |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| 0-30 days | 3,046,240 | 59.95 | 2,923,083 | 63.92 | 3,246,600 | 71.99 |
| 31-60 days | 1,169,286 | 23.01 | 985,251 | 21.55 | 617,199 | 13.69 |
| 61-90 days | 320,183 | 6.30 | 283,050 | 6.19 | 240,470 | 5.33 |
| Over 90 days | 545,629 | 10.74 | 381,387 | 8.34 | 405,410 | 8.99 |
| Total | 5,081,338 | 100.00 | 4,572,771 | 100.00 | 4,509,679 | 100.00 |


|  | FY2017 |  | FY2016 |  | FY2015 |  |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
|  | USD000 | Percent | USD000 | Percent | USD000 | Percent |
| Less: Provision for impairment | -108,616 | -2.14 | -104,379 | -2.28 | -106,172 | -2.35 |
| Trade receivables, net | 4,972,722 | 97.86 | 4,468,392 | 97.72 | 4,403,507 | 97.65 |
| Total sales | 45,349,943 |  | 43,034,731 |  | 44,912,097 |  |

Note: Lenovo's footnotes disclose that general trade customers are provided with credit terms ranging from 0 to 120 days.

These data indicate that total accounts receivable increased by 11 percent (net, after impairment) in FY2017 versus FY2016, while total sales increased by only 5.4 percent. Further, the percentage of receivables in all categories older than 30 days has increased over the three-year period, indicating that customers are indeed taking longer to pay. Conversely, the provision for impairment (estimate of uncollectible accounts) has declined as a percent of total receivables. Considering all this information, the company may be increasing customer financing purposely to drive its sales growth. They also may be underestimating the impairment. This should be investigated further by the analyst.

## Payables Turnover and the Number of Days of Payables

The number of days of payables reflects the average number of days the company takes to pay its suppliers, and the payables turnover ratio measures how many times per year the company theoretically pays off all its creditors. A payables turnover ratio that is high (low days payable) relative to the industry could indicate that the company is not making full use of available credit facilities; alternatively, it could result from a company taking advantage of early payment discounts. An excessively low turnover ratio (high days payable) could indicate trouble making payments on time, or alternatively, exploitation of lenient supplier terms. This is another example in which it is useful to look simultaneously at other ratios. If liquidity ratios indicate that the company has sufficient cash and other short-term assets to pay obligations and yet the days payable ratio is relatively high, the analyst would favor the lenient supplier credit and collection policies as an explanation.

## Working Capital Turnover

Working capital turnover indicates how efficiently the company generates revenue with its working capital. For example, a working capital turnover ratio of 4.0 indicates that the company generates EUR4 of revenue for every EUR1 of working capital. A high working capital turnover ratio indicates greater efficiency (i.e., the company is generating a high level of revenues relative to working capital). For some companies, working capital can be near zero or negative, rendering this ratio incapable of being interpreted. The following two ratios are more useful in those circumstances.

## Fixed Asset Turnover

This ratio measures how efficiently the company generates revenues from its investments in fixed assets. Generally, a higher fixed asset turnover ratio indicates more efficient use of fixed assets in generating revenue. A low ratio can indicate inefficiency, a capital-intensive business environment, or a new business not yet operating at full capacity-in which case the analyst will not be able to link the ratio directly to efficiency. In addition, asset turnover can be affected by factors other than a company's efficiency. The fixed asset turnover ratio would be lower for a company whose assets are newer (and, therefore, less depreciated and so reflected in the financial statements
at a higher carrying value) than the ratio for a company with older assets (that are thus more depreciated and so reflected at a lower carrying value). The fixed asset ratio can be erratic because, although revenue may have a steady growth rate, increases in fixed assets may not follow a smooth pattern; so, every year-to-year change in the ratio does not necessarily indicate important changes in the company's efficiency.

## Total Asset Turnover

The total asset turnover ratio measures the company's overall ability to generate revenues with a given level of assets. A ratio of 1.20 would indicate that the company is generating EUR1.20 of revenues for every EUR1 of average assets. A higher ratio indicates greater efficiency. Because this ratio includes both fixed and current assets, inefficient working capital management can distort overall interpretations. It is therefore helpful to analyze working capital and fixed asset turnover ratios separately.

A low asset turnover ratio can be an indicator of inefficiency or of relative capital intensity of the business. The ratio also reflects strategic decisions by management-for example, the decision whether to use a more labor-intensive (and less capital-intensive) approach to its business or a more capital-intensive (and less labor-intensive) approach.

When interpreting activity ratios, the analysts should examine not only the individual ratios but also the collection of relevant ratios to determine the overall efficiency of a company. Example 8 demonstrates the evaluation of activity ratios, both narrow (e.g., days of inventory on hand) and broad (e.g., total asset turnover) for a hypothetical manufacturer.

## EXAMPLE 8

## Evaluation of Activity Ratios

ZZZ Company is a hypothetical manufacturing company. As part of an analysis of management's operating efficiency, an analyst collects the following activity ratios from a data provider:

## Exhibit 21: Operating Efficiency

| Ratio | 2018 | 2017 | 2016 | 2015 |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| DOH | 35.68 | 40.70 | 40.47 | 48.51 |
| DSO | 45.07 | 58.28 | 51.27 | 76.98 |
| Total asset turnover | 0.36 | 0.28 | 0.23 | 0.22 |

These ratios indicate that the company has improved on all three measures of activity over the four-year period. The company appears to be managing its inventory more efficiently, is collecting receivables faster, and is generating a higher level of revenues relative to total assets. The overall trend appears good, but thus far, the analyst has only determined what happened. A more important question is why the ratios improved, because understanding good changes as well as bad ones facilitates judgments about the company's future performance. To answer this question, the analyst examines company financial reports as well as external information about the industry and economy. In examining the annual report, the analyst notes that in the fourth quarter of 2018, the company experienced an "inventory correction" and that the company recorded an allowance for the decline in market value and obsolescence of inventory of about 15 percent of year-end inventory value (compared with about a 6 percent allowance in the prior year). This reduction in the value of inventory accounts for a large portion of the decline in DOH from 40.70 in 2017 to 35.68 in 2018. Management claims


#### Abstract

that this inventory obsolescence is a short-term issue; analysts can watch DOH in future interim periods to confirm this assertion. In any event, all else being equal, the analyst would likely expect DOH to return to a level closer to 40 days going forward.

More positive interpretations can be drawn from the total asset turnover. The analyst finds that the company's revenues increased more than 35 percent, whereas total assets increased only by about 6 percent. Based on external information about the industry and economy, the analyst attributes the increased revenues both to overall growth in the industry and to the company's increased market share. Management was able to achieve growth in revenues with a comparatively modest increase in assets, leading to an improvement in total asset turnover. Note further that part of the reason for the increase in asset turnover is lower DOH and DSO.


## LIQUIDITY RATIOS

calculate and interpret activity, liquidity, solvency, and profitability ratios

Liquidity analysis measures a company's ability to meet its short-term obligations. In the short run, a company's sources of liquidity typically include cash and marketable securities on hand and debt issuance. In the longer run, for non-financial companies, liquidity is addressed by cash flows from operations and managing the structure of liabilities, such as the timing of debt maturities (see the following discussion on the financial sector).

The level of liquidity needed differs from one industry to another. A particular company's liquidity position may vary according to the anticipated need for funds at any given time. Judging whether a company has adequate liquidity requires analysis of its historical funding requirements, current liquidity position, anticipated future funding needs, and options for reducing funding needs or attracting additional funds (including actual and potential sources of such funding).

Larger companies are usually better able to control the level and composition of their liabilities than smaller companies. Therefore, they may have more potential funding sources, including public capital and money markets. Greater discretionary access to capital markets also reduces the size of the liquidity buffer needed relative to companies without such access.

Contingent liabilities, such as letters of credit or financial guarantees, can also be relevant when assessing liquidity. The importance of contingent liabilities varies for the non-banking and banking sector. In the non-banking sector, contingent liabilities (usually disclosed in the footnotes to the company's financial statements) represent potential cash outflows, and when appropriate, should be included in an assessment of a company's liquidity. In the banking sector, contingent liabilities represent potentially significant cash outflows that are not dependent on the bank's financial condition. Although outflows in normal market circumstances typically may be low, a general macroeconomic or market crisis can trigger a substantial increase in cash outflows related to contingent liabilities because of the increase in defaults and business bankruptcies that often accompany such events. In addition, such crises are usually
characterized by diminished levels of overall liquidity, which can further exacerbate funding shortfalls. Therefore, for the banking sector, the effect of contingent liabilities on liquidity warrants particular attention.

## Calculation of Liquidity Ratios

Common liquidity ratios, introduced in earlier modules in Corporate Issuers, are presented in Exhibit 22. These liquidity ratios reflect a company's position at a point in time and, therefore, typically use data from the ending balance sheet rather than averages.

Exhibit 22: Definitions of Commonly Used Liquidity Ratios

| Liquidity Ratios | Numerator | Denominator |
| :--- | :--- | :--- |
| Current ratio | Current assets | Current liabilities |
| Quick ratio | Cash + Short-term marketable investments + Receivables | Current liabilities |
| Cash ratio | Cash + Short-term marketable investments | Current liabilities |
| Defensive interval ratio | Cash + Short-term marketable investments + Receivables | Daily cash expenditures |
| Additional Liquidity Measure |  |  |
| Cash conversion cycle (net operating cycle) | DOH + DSO - Number of days of payables |  |

The defensive interval ratio measures how long a company can pay its daily cash expenditures using only its existing liquid assets, without additional cash flow coming in. This ratio is similar to the "burn rate" often computed for early-stage companies that are funded by venture capital funds and company insiders. The numerator of this ratio includes the same liquid assets used in the quick ratio, and the denominator is an estimate of daily cash expenditures. To obtain daily cash expenditures, the total of cash expenditures for the period is divided by the number of days in the period. Total cash expenditures for a period can be approximated by summing all expenses on the income statement-such as cost of goods sold; selling, general, and administrative expenses; and research and development expenses-and then subtracting any non-cash expenses, such as depreciation and amortization (typically, taxes are not included).

## Interpretation of Liquidity Ratios

In the following, we discuss the interpretation of the five basic liquidity measures presented in Exhibit 22.

## Current Ratio

A higher current ratio indicates a higher level of liquidity (i.e., a greater ability to meet short-term obligations). A lower ratio indicates less liquidity, implying a greater reliance on operating cash flow and outside financing to meet short-term obligations. The current ratio implicitly assumes that inventories and accounts receivable are indeed liquid (which is presumably not the case when related turnover ratios are low).

## Quick Ratio

The quick ratio is more conservative than the current ratio because it includes only the more liquid current assets (sometimes referred to as "quick assets") in relation to current liabilities. Like the current ratio, a higher quick ratio indicates greater liquidity.

The quick ratio reflects the fact that certain current assets-such as prepaid expenses, some taxes, and employee-related prepayments-represent costs of the current period that have been paid in advance and cannot usually be converted back into cash. This ratio also reflects the fact that inventory might not be easily and quickly converted into cash, and furthermore, that a company probably would not be able to sell all of its inventory for an amount equal to its carrying value, especially if it were required to sell the inventory quickly. In situations in which inventories are illiquid (as indicated, for example, by low inventory turnover ratios), the quick ratio may be a better indicator of liquidity than the current ratio.

## Cash Ratio

The cash ratio normally represents a reliable measure of an entity's liquidity in a crisis situation. Only highly marketable short-term investments and cash are included. In a general market crisis, the fair value of marketable securities could decrease significantly as a result of market factors, in which case even this ratio might not provide reliable information.

## Defensive Interval Ratio

The defensive interval ratio measures how long the company can continue to pay its expenses from its existing liquid assets without receiving any additional cash inflow. A defensive interval ratio of 50 would indicate that the company can continue to pay its operating expenses for 50 days before running out of quick assets, assuming no additional cash inflows. A higher defensive interval ratio indicates greater liquidity. If a company's defensive interval ratio is very low relative to peer companies or to the company's own history, the analyst would want to ascertain whether there is sufficient cash inflow expected to mitigate the low defensive interval ratio.

## Cash Conversion Cycle (Net Operating Cycle)

This cash conversion cycle metric indicates the amount of time that elapses from the point when a company invests in working capital until the point at which the company collects cash. A shorter cash conversion cycle indicates greater liquidity. A short cash conversion cycle implies that the company only needs to finance its inventory and accounts receivable for a short period of time. A longer cash conversion cycle indicates lower liquidity; it implies that the company must finance its inventory and accounts receivable for a longer period of time, possibly indicating a need for a higher level of capital to fund current assets. Example 9 demonstrates the advantages of a short cash conversion cycle as well as how a company's business strategies are reflected in financial ratios.

## EXAMPLE 9

## Evaluation of Liquidity Measures

An analyst is evaluating the liquidity of Apple and calculates the number of days of receivables, inventory, and accounts payable, as well as the overall cash conversion cycle, as shown in Exhibit 23:

Exhibit 23: Liquidity of Apple

|  | FY2017 | FY2016 | FY2015 |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| DSO | 27 | 28 | 27 |
| DOH | 9 | 6 | 6 |
| Less: Number of days of payables | 112 | 101 | 86 |
| Equals: Cash conversion cycle | (76) | (67) | (53) |

The minimal DOH indicates that Apple maintains lean inventories, which is attributable to key aspects of the company's business model where manufacturing is outsourced. In isolation, the increase in number of days payable (from 86 days in FY2015 to 112 days in FY2017) might suggest an inability to pay suppliers; however, in Apple's case, the balance sheet (not shown here) indicates that the company has more than USD70 billion of cash and short-term investments, which would be more than enough to pay suppliers sooner if Apple chose to do so. Instead, Apple takes advantage of the favorable credit terms granted by its suppliers. The overall effect is a negative cash cycle, a somewhat unusual result. Instead of requiring additional capital to fund working capital as is the case for most companies, Apple has excess cash to invest for over 50 days during that three-year period (reflected on the balance sheet as short-term investments) on which it is earning, rather than paying, interest.

## EXAMPLE 10

## Bounds and Context of Financial Measures

The previous example focused on the cash conversion cycle, which many companies identify as a key performance metric. The less positive the number of days in the cash conversion cycle, typically, the better it is considered to be. However, is this always true?

This example considers the following question: If a larger negative number of days in a cash conversion cycle is considered to be a desirable performance metric, does identifying a company with a large negative cash conversion cycle necessarily imply good performance?

Using a historical example, National Datacomputer, a technology company, had large negative number of days in its cash conversion cycle during the 2005 to 2009 period. In 2008, its cash conversion cycle was -275.5 days.

Exhibit 24: National Datacomputer Inc. (US dollar millions)

| Fiscal year | 2004 | 2005 | 2006 | 2007 | 2008 | 2009 |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| Sales | 3.248 | 2.672 | 2.045 | 1.761 | 1.820 | 1.723 |
| Cost of goods sold | 1.919 | 1.491 | 0.898 | 1.201 | 1.316 | 1.228 |
| Receivables, Total | 0.281 | 0.139 | 0.099 | 0.076 | 0.115 | 0.045 |
| Inventories, Total | 0.194 | 0.176 | 0.010 | 0.002 | 0.000 | 0.000 |
| Accounts payable | 0.223 | 0.317 | 0.366 | 1.423 | 0.704 | 0.674 |
| DSO |  | 28.69 | 21.24 | 18.14 | 19.15 | 16.95 |


| Fiscal year | 2004 | 2005 | 2006 | 2007 | 2008 | 2009 |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| DOH |  | 45.29 | 37.80 | 1.82 | 0.28 | 0.00 |
| Less: Number of days of payables* |  | 66.10 | 138.81 | 271.85 | 294.97 | 204.79 |
| Equals: Cash conversion cycle |  | 7.88 | -79.77 | -251.89 | -275.54 | -187.84 |

*Calculated using Cost of goods sold as an approximation of purchases. Ending inventories 2008 and 2009 are reported as $\$ 0$ million; therefore, inventory turnover for 2009 cannot be measured. However, given inventory and average sales per day, DOH in 2009 is 0.00.

Source: Raw data from Compustat. Ratios calculated."
National Datacomputer had a negative cash conversion cycle because the company's accounts payable increased substantially over the period. An increase from approximately 66 days in 2005 to 295 days in 2008 to pay trade creditors is clearly a negative signal. In addition, the company's inventories disappeared, most likely because the company did not have enough cash to purchase new inventory and was unable to get additional credit from its suppliers.

Of course, an analyst would have immediately noted the negative trends in these data, as well as additional data throughout the company's financial statements. In its management discussion and analysis (MD\&A), the company clearly reports the risks as follows:

Because we have historically had losses and only a limited amount of cash has been generated from operations, we have funded our operating activities to date primarily from the sale of securities and from the sale of a product line in 2009. In order to continue to fund our operations, we may need to raise additional capital, through the sale of securities. We cannot be certain that any such financing will be available on acceptable terms, or at all. Moreover, additional equity financing, if available, would likely be dilutive to the holders of our common stock, and debt financing, if available, would likely involve restrictive covenants and a security interest in all or substantially all of our assets. If we fail to obtain acceptable financing when needed, we may not have sufficient resources to fund our normal operations which would have a material adverse effect on our business.

IF WE ARE UNABLE TO GENERATE ADEQUATE WORKING CAPITAL FROM OPERATIONS OR RAISE ADDITIONAL CAPITAL THERE IS SUBSTANTIAL DOUBT ABOUT THE COMPANY'S ABILITY TO CONTINUE AS A GOING CONCERN. (emphasis added by company)

Subsequently, the company's 2010 Form 10-K reported:
In January 2011, due to our inability to meet our financial obligations and the impending loss of a critical distribution agreement granting us the right to distribute certain products, our secured lenders ("Secured Parties") acting upon an event of default, sold certain of our assets (other than cash and accounts receivable) to Micronet, Ltd. ("Micronet"), an unaffiliated corporation pursuant to the terms of an asset purchase agreement between the Secured Parties and Micronet dated January 10, 2010 (the "Asset Purchase Agreement"). In order to induce Micronet to enter into the agreement, the Company also provided certain representations and warranties regarding certain business matters.

In summary, it is always necessary to consider ratios within bounds of reasonability and to understand the reasons underlying changes in ratios. Ratios must not only be calculated but also must be interpreted by an analyst.

Source: Form 10-K, National Datacomputer Inc., 2009, p. 7.
Source: Form 10-K, National Datacomputer Inc., 2010.

## SOLVENCY RATIOS

calculate and interpret activity, liquidity, solvency, and profitability ratios

Solvency refers to a company's ability to fulfill its long-term debt obligations. Assessment of a company's ability to pay its long-term obligations (i.e., to make interest and principal payments) generally includes an in-depth analysis of the components of its financial structure. Solvency ratios, introduced in earlier modules in Corporate Issuers, provide information regarding the relative amount of debt in the company's capital structure and the adequacy of earnings and cash flow to cover interest expenses and other fixed charges (such as lease payments) as they come due.

By analyzing financial statements, an analyst aims to understand levels and trends in a company's use of financial leverage in relation to past practices and the practices of peer companies. Analysts also need to be aware that the greater a company's operating leverage, the greater the risk of the operating income stream available to cover debt payments; operating leverage can thus limit a company's capacity to use financial leverage.

A company's relative solvency is fundamental to valuation of its debt securities and its creditworthiness. Understanding a company's use of debt can provide analysts with insight into the company's future business prospects because management's decisions about financing may signal their beliefs about a company's future. For example, the issuance of long-term debt to repurchase common shares may indicate that management believes the market is underestimating the company's prospects and that the shares are undervalued.

## Calculation of Solvency Ratios

The two primary types of solvency ratios are debt ratios and coverage ratios. Debt ratios focus on the balance sheet and measure the amount of debt capital relative to equity capital. Coverage ratios focus on the income statement and measure the ability of a company to cover its debt payments. These ratios are useful in assessing a company's solvency and, therefore, in evaluating the quality of a company's bonds and other debt obligations.

Exhibit 25 describes commonly used solvency ratios. The first three of the debt ratios presented use total debt in the numerator. The definition of total debt used in these ratios varies, with some market participants using the sum of interest-bearing short-term and long-term debt, excluding liabilities such as accrued expenses, accounts payable, and leases. (For calculations in this module, we use this definition.) Other market participants use definitions that are more inclusive (e.g., all liabilities) or restrictive (e.g., long-term debt only, in which case the ratio is sometimes qualified as "long-term," as in "long-term debt-to-equity ratio"). Finally, analysts also use solvency ratios that deduct cash, cash equivalents, and marketable securities from
interest-bearing short-term and long-term debt to calculate net debt (or net cash if the former exceeds the latter). The assumption is that cash, cash equivalents, and marketable securities could be used to pay debt obligations, so it is only debt in excess of this amount that must be covered by future operating cash flows. Analysts should be transparent about their calculation methodologies and closely scrutinize ratios reported by issuers.

Exhibit 25: Definitions of Commonly Used Solvency Ratios

| Solvency Ratios | Numerator | Denominator |
| :--- | :--- | :--- |
| Debt Ratios |  |  |
| Debt-to-assets ratio ${ }^{\text {a }}$ | Total debt ${ }^{\text {b }}$ | Total assets |
| Debt-to-capital ratio | Total debt ${ }^{\text {b }}$ | Total debt ${ }^{\text {b }}$ + Total shareholders' equity |
| Debt-to-equity ratio | Total debt ${ }^{\text {b }}$ | Total shareholders' equity |
| Financial leverage ratio ${ }^{\text {c }}$ | Average total assets | Average total equity |
| Debt-to-EBITDA | Total or net debt | EBITDA |
| Coverage Ratios |  |  |
| Interest coverage | EBIT | Interest payments |
| Fixed charge coverage | EBIT + Lease payments | Interest payments + Lease payments |

a"Total debt ratio" is another name sometimes used for this ratio.
${ }^{\mathrm{b}}$ In this reading, total debt is the sum of interest-bearing short-term and long-term debt.
${ }^{\text {c }}$ Average total assets divided by average total equity is used for the purposes of this reading (in particular, Dupont analysis covered later). In practice, period-end total assets divided by period-end total equity is often used."

## Interpretation of Solvency Ratios

In the following, we discuss the interpretation of the basic solvency ratios presented in Exhibit 25.

## Debt-to-Assets Ratio

This ratio measures the percentage of total assets financed with debt. For example, a debt-to-assets ratio of 0.40 or 40 percent indicates that 40 percent of the company's assets are financed with debt. Generally, higher debt means higher financial risk and thus weaker solvency.

## Debt-to-Capital Ratio

The debt-to-capital ratio measures the percentage of a company's capital (debt plus equity) represented by debt. As with the previous ratio, a higher ratio generally means higher financial risk and thus indicates weaker solvency.

## Debt-to-Equity Ratio

The debt-to-equity ratio measures the amount of debt capital relative to equity capital. Interpretation is similar to the preceding two ratios (i.e., a higher ratio indicates weaker solvency). A ratio of 1.0 would indicate equal amounts of debt and equity, which is equivalent to a debt-to-capital ratio of 50 percent. Alternative definitions of this ratio use the market value of stockholders' equity rather than its book value (or use the market values of both stockholders' equity and debt).

## Financial Leverage Ratio

The financial leverage ratio (often called simply the "leverage ratio") measures the amount of total assets supported for each one money unit of equity. For example, a value of 3 for this ratio means that each EUR1 of equity supports EUR3 of total assets. The higher the financial leverage ratio, the more leveraged the company is in the sense of using debt and other liabilities to finance assets. This ratio is often defined in terms of average total assets and average total equity.

## Debt-to-EBITDA Ratio

The debt-to-EBITDA ratio estimates how many years it would take to repay total debt based on earnings before income taxes, depreciation, and amortization (an approximation of operating cash flow). This ratio is commonly used in debt covenants between issuers and debt investors.

## Interest Coverage

The interest coverage ratio measures the number of times a company's EBIT could cover its interest payments. Thus, it is sometimes referred to as "times interest earned." A higher interest coverage ratio indicates stronger solvency, offering greater assurance that the company can service its debt (i.e., bank debt, bonds, notes) from operating earnings. This ratio is commonly used in debt covenants between issuers and lenders or fixed income investors.

## Fixed Charge Coverage

The fixed charge coverage ratio relates fixed charges, or obligations, to the cash flow generated by the company. It measures the number of times a company's earnings (before interest, taxes, and lease payments) can cover the company's interest and lease payments. Similar to the interest coverage ratio, a higher fixed charge coverage ratio implies stronger solvency, offering greater assurance that the company can service its debt (i.e., bank debt, bonds, notes, and leases) from normal earnings. The ratio is sometimes used as an indication of the quality of the preferred dividend, with a higher ratio indicating a more secure preferred dividend.

Example 11 demonstrates the use of solvency ratios in evaluating the creditworthiness of a company.

## EXAMPLE 11

## Evaluation of Solvency Ratios

A credit analyst is evaluating the solvency of Eskom, a South African public utility based on financial statements for the year ended 31 March 2017. The data in Exhibit 26 are gathered from the company's 2017 annual report:

Exhibit 26: Eskom 2017 Annual Report

| South African rand, millions | 2017 | 2016 | 2015 |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| Total Assets | 710,009 | 663,170 | 559,688 |
| Short-Term Debt | 18,530 | 15,688 | 19,976 |
| Long-Term Debt | 336,770 | 306,970 | 277,458 |
| Total Liabilities | 534,067 | 480,818 | 441,269 |
| Total Equity | 175,942 | 182,352 | 118,419 |


| 4. What is the discernable trend over the three years? <br> Solution: <br> On all three metrics, the company's leverage decreased from 2015 to 2016 and increased from 2016 to 2017. For 2016 the decrease in leverage resulted from a conversion of subordinated debt into equity as well as additional issuance of equity. However, in 2017 debt levels increased again relative to assets, capital, and equity indicating that the company's solvency has weakened. From a creditor's perspective, lower solvency (higher debt) indicates higher risk of default on obligations. |
| :--- |

As with all ratio analysis, it is important to consider leverage ratios in a broader context. In general, companies with lower business risk and operations that generate steady cash flows are better positioned to take on more leverage without a commensurate increase in the risk of insolvency. In other words, a higher proportion of debt financing poses less risk of non-payment of interest and debt principal to a company with steady cash flows than to a company with volatile cash flows.
calculate and interpret activity, liquidity, solvency, and profitability ratios

The ability to generate profit on capital invested is a key determinant of a company's overall value and the value of the securities it issues. Consequently, many equity analysts consider profitability to be a key focus of their analytical efforts.

Profitability reflects a company's competitive position in the market, and by extension, the quality of its management. The income statement reveals the sources of earnings and the components of revenue and expenses. Earnings can be distributed to shareholders or reinvested in the company.

## Calculation of Profitability Ratios

Profitability ratios measure the return earned by the company during a period. Exhibit 27 provides the definitions of a selection of commonly used profitability ratios, some of which were introduced in earlier modules in Corporate Issuers. Return-on-sales profitability ratios express various subtotals on the income statement (e.g., gross profit, operating profit, net profit) as a percentage of revenue. Essentially, these ratios constitute part of a common-size income statement discussed earlier. Return on investment profitability ratios measure income relative to assets, equity, or total capital employed by the company. For operating ROA, returns are measured as operating income, that is, prior to deducting interest on debt capital. For ROA and ROE, returns are measured as net income, that is, after deducting interest paid on debt capital. For return on common equity, returns are measured as net income minus preferred dividends (because preferred dividends are a return to preferred equity).

Exhibit 27: Definitions of Commonly Used Profitability Ratios

| Profitability Ratios | Numerator | Denominator |
| :--- | :--- | :--- |
| Return on Sales ${ }^{\text {a }}$ |  |  |
| Gross profit margin | Gross profit | Revenue |
| Operating profit margin | Operating income ${ }^{\text {b }}$ | Revenue |
| Pretax margin | EBT (earnings before tax but after interest) | Revenue |
| Net profit margin | Net income | Revenue |
| Return on Investment |  |  |
| Operating ROA | Operating income | Average total assets |
| ROA | Net income | Average total assets |
| Return on invested capital | EBIT $\times$ (1- Effective Tax Rate) | Average total short- and long-term debt and equity |
| ROE | Net income | Average total equity |
| Return on common equity | Net income - Preferred dividends | Average common equity |

[^0]securities. Of utmost importance is that the analyst compute ratios consistently whether comparing different companies or analyzing one company over time."

## Interpretation of Profitability Ratios

In the following, we discuss the interpretation of the profitability ratios presented in Exhibit 27. For each of the profitability ratios, a higher ratio indicates greater profitability.

## Gross Profit Margin

Gross profit margin indicates the percentage of revenue available to cover operating and other expenses and to generate profit. Higher gross profit margin indicates some combination of higher product pricing and lower product costs. The ability to charge a higher price is constrained by competition, so gross profits are affected by (and usually inversely related to) competition. If a product has a competitive advantage (e.g., superior branding, better quality, or exclusive technology), the company is better able to charge more for it. On the cost side, higher gross profit margin can also indicate that a company has a competitive advantage in product costs.

## Operating Profit Margin

Operating profit is calculated as gross profit minus operating costs. So, an operating profit margin increasing faster than the gross profit margin can indicate improvements in controlling operating costs, such as administrative overheads. In contrast, a declining operating profit margin could be an indicator of deteriorating control over operating costs.

## Pretax Margin

Pretax income (also called "earnings before tax" or EBT) is calculated as operating profit minus interest, and the pretax margin is the ratio of pretax income to revenue. The pretax margin reflects the effects on profitability of leverage and other (non-operating) income and expenses. If a company's pretax margin is increasing primarily as a result of increasing amounts of non-operating income, the analyst should evaluate whether this increase reflects a deliberate change in a company's business focus and, therefore, the likelihood that the increase will continue.

## Net Profit Margin

Net profit, or net income, is calculated as revenue minus all expenses. Net income includes both recurring and non-recurring components. Generally, the net income used in calculating the net profit margin is adjusted for non-recurring items to offer a better view of a company's potential future profitability.

## ROA

ROA measures the return earned by a company on its assets. The higher the ratio, the more income is generated by a given level of assets. Most databases compute this ratio as follows:

```
Net income 
```

An issue with this computation is that net income is the return to equity holders, whereas assets are financed by both equity holders and creditors. Interest expense (the return to creditors) has already been subtracted in the numerator. Some analysts,
therefore, prefer to add back interest expense in the numerator. In such cases, interest must be adjusted for income taxes because net income is determined after taxes. With this adjustment, the ratio would be computed as follows:

$$
\frac{\text { Net income }+ \text { Interest expense }(1-\text { Tax rate })}{\text { Average total assets }} .
$$

Alternatively, some analysts elect to compute ROA on a pre-interest and pre-tax basis (operating ROA in Exhibit 27) as follows:

$$
\frac{\text { Operating income or EBIT }}{\text { Average total assets }}
$$

In this ROA calculation, returns are measured prior to deducting interest on debt capital (i.e., as operating income or EBIT). This measure reflects the return on all assets invested in the company, whether financed with liabilities, debt, or equity. Whichever form of ROA is chosen, the analyst must use it consistently in comparisons to other companies or time periods.

## Return on Invested Capital

Return on invested capital measures the after-tax profitability a company earns on all of the capital that it employs (short-term debt, long-term debt, and equity). As with operating ROA, returns are measured prior to deducting interest on debt capital (i.e., as operating income or EBIT).

## ROE

ROE measures the return earned by a company on its equity capital, including minority equity, preferred equity, and common equity. As noted, return is measured as net income (i.e., interest on debt capital is not included in the return on equity capital). A variation of ROE is return on common equity, which measures the return earned by a company only on its common equity.

Both ROA and ROE are important measures of profitability and will be explored in more detail later. As with other ratios, profitability ratios should be evaluated individually and as a group to gain an understanding of what is driving profitability (operating versus non-operating activities). Example 12 demonstrates the evaluation of profitability ratios and the use of the management report (sometimes called management discussion and analysis or management commentary) that accompanies financial statements to explain the trend in ratios.

## EXAMPLE 12

## Evaluation of Profitability Ratios

Recall from Example 1 that an analysis found that Apple's gross margin declined over the three-year period FY2015 to FY2017. An analyst would like to further explore Apple's profitability using a five-year period. He gathers the following revenue data and calculates the following profitability ratios from information in Apple's annual reports, as shown in Exhibit 28:

Exhibit 28: Profitability Ratios for Apple (US dollar millions)

|  | 2017 | 2016 | 2015 | 2014 | 2013 |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| Sales | 229,234 | 215,639 | 233,715 | 182,795 | 170,910 |
| Gross profit | 88,186 | 84,263 | 93,626 | 70,537 | 64,304 |
| Operating income | 61,344 | 60,024 | 71,230 | 52,503 | 48,999 |


|  | 2017 | 2016 | 2015 | 2014 | 2013 |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| Pre-tax income | 64,089 | 61,372 | 72,515 | 53,483 | 50,155 |
| Net income | 48,351 | 45,687 | 53,394 | 39,510 | 37,037 |
| Gross profit margin | 38.47\% | 39.08\% | 40.06\% | 38.59\% | 37.62\% |
| Operating income margin | 26.76\% | 27.84\% | 30.48\% | 28.72\% | 28.67\% |
| Pre-tax margin | 27.96\% | 28.46\% | 31.03\% | 29.26\% | 29.35\% |
| Net profit margin | 21.09\% | 21.19\% | 22.85\% | 21.61\% | 21.67\% |

1. Evaluate the overall trend in Apple's profitability ratios for the five-year period.

## Solution:

Sales had increased steadily through 2015, dropped in 2016, and rebounded somewhat in 2017. As noted in Example 1, the sales decline in 2016 was related to a decline in iPhone sales and weakness in foreign currencies. Margins also rose from 2013 to 2015 and declined in 2016. However, in spite of the increase in sales in 2017, all margins declined slightly indicating costs were rising faster than sales. In spite of the fluctuations, Apple's bottom line net profit margin was relatively stable over the five-year period.

## QUESTION SET

1. Which ratio would a company most likely use to measure its ability to meet short-term obligations?
A. Current ratio
B. Payables turnover
C. Gross profit margin

## Solution:

A is correct. The current ratio is a liquidity ratio. It compares the net amount of current assets expected to be converted into cash within the year with liabilities falling due in the same period. A current ratio of 1.0 would indicate that the company would have just enough current assets to pay current liabilities.
2. Which of the following ratios would be most useful in determining a company's ability to cover its lease and interest payments?
A. ROA
B. Total asset turnover
C. Fixed charge coverage

## Solution:

C is correct. The fixed charge coverage ratio is a coverage ratio that relates known fixed charges or obligations to a measure of operating profit or cash flow generated by the company. Coverage ratios, a category of solvency ratios, measure the ability of a company to cover its payments related to debt and leases.
3. Assuming no changes in other variables, which of the following would decrease ROA?
A. An increase in average assets
B. A decrease in interest expense
C. A decrease in the effective tax rate

Solution:
A is correct. Assuming no changes in other variables, an increase in average assets (an increase in the denominator) would decrease ROA. A decrease in either the effective tax rate or interest expense, assuming no changes in other variables, would increase ROA.

## INTEGRATED FINANCIAL RATIO ANALYSIS

describe relationships among ratios and evaluate a company using ratio analysis

In prior lessons, the text presented separately activity, liquidity, solvency, and profitability ratios. Before discussing valuation ratios, this lesson demonstrates the importance of examining a variety of financial ratios-not a single ratio or category of ratios in isolation-to ascertain the overall position and performance of a company. Experience shows that the information from one ratio category can be helpful in answering questions raised by another category and that the most accurate overall picture comes from integrating information from all sources.

## The Overall Ratio Picture: Examples

We present two simple examples to introduce the use of a variety of ratios to address an analytical task. Example 13 shows how the analysis of a pair of activity ratios resolves an issue concerning a company's liquidity. Example 14 shows that examining the overall ratios of multiple companies can assist an analyst in drawing conclusions about their relative performances.

## EXAMPLE 13

## A Variety of Ratios

An analyst is evaluating the liquidity of a Canadian manufacturing company and obtains the liquidity ratios shown in Exhibit 29:

Exhibit 29: Liquidity Ratios

| Fiscal Year | 10 | 9 | 8 |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| Current ratio | 2.1 | 1.9 | 1.6 |
| Quick ratio | 0.8 | 0.9 | 1.0 |


[^0]:    a "Sales" is being used as a synonym for "revenue."
    ${ }^{\text {b }}$ Some analysts use EBIT as a shortcut representation of operating income. Note that EBIT, strictly speaking, includes non-operating items such as dividends received and gains and losses on investment

