index as a benchmark, they might conclude that the small-cap manager is earning his or her fees and should be retained or given additional assets to invest. Using the small-cap index as a benchmark might lead to a very different conclusion.

## Model Portfolios for Investment Products

Indexes also serve as the basis for the development of new investment products. Using indexes as benchmarks for actively managed portfolios has led some investors to conclude that they should invest in the benchmarks instead. Based on the CAPM's conclusion that investors should hold the market portfolio, broad market index funds have been developed to function as proxies for the market portfolio.

Investment management firms initially developed and managed index portfolios for institutional investors. Eventually, mutual fund companies introduced index funds for individual investors. Subsequently, investment management firms introduced exchange-traded funds, which are managed the same way as index mutual funds but trade like stocks.

The first ETFs were based on existing indexes. As the popularity of ETFs increased, index providers created new indexes for the specific purpose of forming ETFs, leading to the creation of numerous narrowly defined indexes with corresponding ETFs. The VanEck Vectors Vietnam ETF, for example, allows investors to invest in the equity market of Vietnam.

The choice of indexes to meet the needs of investors is extensive. Index providers are constantly looking for opportunities to develop indexes to meet the needs of investors.

## EQUITY INDEXES

describe types of equity indexes
compare types of security market indexes

A wide variety of equity indexes exist, including broad market, multi-market, sector, and style indexes.

## Broad Market Indexes

A broad equity market index, as its name suggests, represents an entire given equity market and typically includes securities representing more than 90 percent of the selected market. For example, the Shanghai Stock Exchange Composite Index (SSE) is a market-capitalization-weighted index of all shares that trade on the Shanghai Stock Exchange. In the United States, the Wilshire 5000 Total Market Index is a market-capitalization-weighted index that includes all US equities with readily available prices and is designed to represent the entire US equity market. ${ }^{3}$ The Russell 3000, consisting of the largest 3,000 stocks by market capitalization, represents approximately 98 percent of the US equity market.

[^0]
## Multi-Market Indexes

Multi-market indexes usually comprise indexes from different countries and regions and are designed to represent multiple security markets. Multi-market indexes may represent multiple national markets, geographic regions, economic development groups, and, in some cases, the entire world. World indexes are of importance to investors who take a global approach to equity investing without any particular bias toward a particular country or region. A number of index providers publish families of multi-market equity indexes.

MSCI offers a number of multi-market indexes. As shown in Exhibit 7, MSCI classifies countries and regions along two dimensions: level of economic development and geographic region. Developmental groups, which MSCI refers to as market classifications, include developed markets, emerging markets, and frontier markets. The geographic regions are largely divided by longitudinal lines of the globe: the Americas, Europe with Africa, and Asia with the Pacific. MSCI provides country- and region-specific indexes for each of the developed and emerging markets within its multi-market indexes. MSCI periodically reviews the classifications of markets in its indexes for movement from frontier markets to emerging markets and from emerging markets to developed markets and reconstitutes the indexes accordingly.

Exhibit 7: MSCI Global Investable Market Indexes (as of October 2018)
Developed Markets

| Americas |  | Europe and Middle East |  |  |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| Canada, United States |  | Austria, Belgium, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, United Kingdom |  | Australia, Hong Kong SAR, Japan, New Zealand, Singapore |
| Emerging Markets |  |  |  |  |
| Americas |  | Europe, Middle East, Africa |  |  |
|  | Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Mexico, Peru | Czech Republic, Egypt, Greece, Hungary, Poland, Qatar, Russia, South Africa, Turkey, United Arab Emirates |  | Chinese mainland, India, Indonesia, South Korea, Malaysia, Pakistan, Philippines, Taiwan region, Thailand |
| Frontier Markets |  |  |  |  |
| Americas | Europe \& CIS | Africa | Middle | Asia |
| Argentina | Croatia, Estonia, Lithuania, Kazakhstan, Romania, Serbia, Slovenia | Kenya, Mauritius, Morocco, Nigeria, Tunisia, WAEMU ${ }^{1}$ | Bahrain, Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Oman | Bangladesh, Sri Lanka, Vietnam |


| MSCI Standalone Market Indexes ${ }^{2}$ |  |  |  |  |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| Europe, Middle East, and Africa | Americas | Europe and CIS | Africa | Middle East |
| Saudi Arabia | Jamaica, Panama, ${ }^{3}$ Trinidad \& Tobago | Bosnia Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Ukraine | Botswana, Ghana, Zimbabwe | Palestine |

[^1]Frontier Markets Index. However, these indexes use either the Emerging Markets or the Frontier Markets methodological criteria concerning size and liquidity.
${ }^{3}$ MSCI Panama Index has been launched as a Standalone Market Index.
Source: adapted from MSCI (https://www.msci.com/en/market-cap-weighted-indexes), October 2018.

## Fundamental Weighting in Multi-Market Indexes

Some index providers weight the securities within each country/region by market capitalization and then weight each country/region in the overall index in proportion to its relative GDP, effectively creating fundamental weighting in multi-market indexes. GDP-weighted indexes were some of the first fundamentally weighted indexes created. Introduced in 1987 by MSCI to address the 60 percent weight of Japanese equities in the market-capitalization-weighted MSCI EAFE Index at the time, GDP-weighted indexes reduced the allocation to Japanese equities by half. ${ }^{4}$

## Sector Indexes

Sector indexes represent and track different economic sectors-such as consumer goods, energy, finance, health care, and technology-on either a national, regional, or global basis. Because different sectors of the economy behave differently over the course of the business cycle, some investors may seek to overweight or underweight their exposure to particular sectors.

Sector indexes are organized as families; each index within the family represents an economic sector. Typically, the aggregation of a sector index family is equivalent to a broad market index. Economic sector classification can be applied on a global, regional, or country-specific basis, but no universally agreed upon sector classification method exists.

Sector indexes play an important role in performance analysis because they provide a means to determine whether a portfolio manager is more successful at stock selection or sector allocation. Sector indexes also serve as model portfolios for sector-specific ETFs and other investment products.

## Style Indexes

Style indexes represent groups of securities classified according to market capitalization, value, growth, or a combination of these characteristics. They are intended to reflect the investing styles of certain investors, such as the growth investor, value investor, and small-cap investor.

## Market Capitalization

Market-capitalization indexes represent securities categorized according to the major capitalization categories: large cap, midcap, and small cap. With no universal definition of these categories, the indexes differ on the distinctions between large cap and midcap and between midcap and small cap, as well as the minimum market-capitalization size required to be included in a small-cap index. Classification into categories can be based on absolute market capitalization (e.g., below $€ 100$ million) or relative market capitalization (e.g., the smallest 2,500 stocks).

[^2]
[^0]:    3 Despite its name, the Wilshire 5000 has no constraint on the number of securities that can be included. It included approximately 5,000 securities at inception.

[^1]:    ${ }^{1}$ The West African Economic and Monetary Union (WAEMU) consists of the following countries: Benin, Burkina Faso, Ivory Coast, Guinea-Bissau, Mali, Niger, Senegal, and Togo. Currently the MSCI WAEMU Indexes include securities classified in Senegal, Ivory Coast, and Burkina Faso.
    ${ }^{2}$ The MSCI Standalone Market Indexes are not included in the MSCI Emerging Markets Index or MSCI

[^2]:    4 Steven A. Schoenfeld, Active Index Investing (Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley \& Sons, 2004):220.

