in-dex, noun (pl.in•dex.es or in•di•ces) Latin indic-, index, from indicare to indicate: an indicator, sign, or measure of something.

## ORIGIN OF MARKET INDEXES

Investors had access to regularly published data on individual security prices in London as early as 1698, but nearly 200 years passed before they had access to a simple indicator to reflect security market information. To give readers a sense of how the US stock market in general performed on a given day, publishers Charles H. Dow and Edward D. Jones introduced the Dow Jones Average, the world's first security market index, in 1884. The index, which appeared in The Customers' Afternoon Letter, consisted of the stocks of nine railroads and two industrial companies. It eventually became the Dow Jones Transportation Average. Convinced that industrial companies, rather than railroads, would be "the great speculative market" of the future, Dow and Jones introduced a second index in May 1896-the Dow Jones Industrial Average (DJIA). It had an initial value of 40.94 and consisted of 12 stocks from major US industries. Today, investors can choose from among thousands of indexes to measure and monitor different security markets and asset classes.

This reading is organized as follows. Section 2 defines a security market index and explains how to calculate the price return and total return of an index for a single period and over multiple periods. Section 3 describes how indexes are constructed and managed. Section 4 discusses the use of market indexes. Sections 5, 6, and 7 discuss various types of indexes, and the final section summarizes the reading. Practice problems follow the conclusions and summary.

## INDEX DEFINITION AND CALCULATIONS OF VALUE AND RETURNS

describe a security market index
calculate and interpret the value, price return, and total return of an index

A security market index represents a given security market, market segment, or asset class. Most indexes are constructed as portfolios of marketable securities.

The value of an index is calculated on a regular basis using either the actual or estimated market prices of the individual securities, known as constituent securities, within the index. For each security market index, investors may encounter two versions of the same index (i.e., an index with identical constituent securities and weights): one version based on price return and one version based on total return. As the name suggests, a price return index, also known as a price index, reflects only the prices of the constituent securities within the index. A total return index, in contrast, reflects not only the prices of the constituent securities but also the reinvestment of all income received since inception.

At inception, the values of the price and total return versions of an index are equal. As time passes, however, the value of the total return index, which includes the reinvestment of all dividends and/or interest received, will exceed the value of the price return index by an increasing amount. A look at how the values of each version are calculated over multiple periods illustrates why.

The value of a price return index is calculated as:

$$
V_{P R I}=\frac{\sum_{i=1}^{N} n_{i} P_{i}}{D}
$$

where
$V_{P R I}=$ the value of the price return index
$n_{i}=$ the number of units of constituent security $i$ held in the index portfolio
$N=$ the number of constituent securities in the index
$P_{i}=$ the unit price of constituent security $i$
$D=$ the value of the divisor
The divisor is a number initially chosen at inception. It is frequently chosen so that the price index has a convenient initial value, such as 1,000 . The index provider then adjusts the value of the divisor as necessary to avoid changes in the index value that are unrelated to changes in the prices of its constituent securities. For example, when changing index constituents, the index provider may adjust the divisor so that the value of the index with the new constituents equals the value of the index prior to the changes.

Index return calculations, like calculations of investment portfolio returns, may measure price return or total return. Price return measures only price appreciation or percentage change in price. Total return measures price appreciation plus interest, dividends, and other distributions.

## Calculation of Single-Period Returns

For a security market index, price return can be calculated in two ways: either the percentage change in value of the price return index, or the weighted average of price returns of the constituent securities. The price return of an index can be expressed as:

$$
\mathrm{PR}_{I}=\frac{V_{P R I 1}-V_{P R I 0}}{V_{P R I 0}}
$$

where
$\mathrm{PR}_{I}=$ the price return of the index portfolio (as a decimal number, i.e., 12 percent is 0.12 )
$V_{P R I 1}=$ the value of the price return index at the end of the period
$V_{P R I 0}=$ the value of the price return index at the beginning of the period
Similarly, the price return of each constituent security can be expressed as:

$$
\mathrm{PR}_{i}=\frac{P_{i 1}-P_{i 0}}{P_{i 0}}
$$

where

$$
\begin{aligned}
\mathrm{PR}_{i} & =\text { the price return of constituent security } i \text { (as a decimal number) } \\
P_{i 1} & =\text { the price of constituent security } i \text { at the end of the period } \\
P_{i 0} & =\text { the price of constituent security } i \text { at the beginning of the period }
\end{aligned}
$$

Because the price return of the index equals the weighted average of price returns of the individual securities, we can write:

$$
\mathrm{PR}_{I}=\sum_{i=1}^{N} \mathrm{w}_{i} \mathrm{PR}_{i}=\sum_{i=1}^{N} \mathrm{w}_{i}\left(\frac{P_{i 1}-P_{i 0}}{P_{i 0}}\right)
$$

where:

$$
\begin{aligned}
\mathrm{PR}_{I}= & \text { the price return of index portfolio (as a decimal number) } \\
\mathrm{PR}_{i}= & \text { the price return of constituent security } i \text { (as a decimal number) } \\
N= & \text { the number of individual securities in the index } \\
\mathrm{W}_{i}= & \text { the weight of security } i \text { (the fraction of the index portfolio allocated to } \\
& \text { security } i) \\
P_{i 1}= & \text { the price of constituent security } i \text { at the end of the period } \\
P_{i 0}= & \text { the price of constituent security } i \text { at the beginning of the period }
\end{aligned}
$$

Equation 4 can be rewritten simply as:

$$
\mathrm{PR}_{I}=\mathrm{w}_{1} \mathrm{PR}_{1}+\mathrm{w}_{2} \mathrm{PR}_{2}+\ldots+\mathrm{w}_{N} \mathrm{PR}_{N}
$$

where

$$
\begin{aligned}
\mathrm{PR}_{I}= & \text { the price return of index portfolio (as a decimal number) } \\
\mathrm{PR}_{i}= & \text { the price return of constituent security } i \text { (as a decimal number) } \\
\mathrm{W}_{i}= & \text { the weight of security } i \text { (the fraction of the index portfolio allocated to } \\
& \text { security } i) \\
N= & \text { the number of securities in the index }
\end{aligned}
$$

Total return measures price appreciation plus interest, dividends, and other distributions. Thus, the total return of an index is the price appreciation, or change in the value of the price return index, plus income (dividends and/or interest) over the period, expressed as a percentage of the beginning value of the price return index. The total return of an index can be expressed as:

$$
\mathrm{TR}_{I}=\frac{V_{P R I 1}-V_{P R I 0}+I n c_{I}}{V_{P R I 0}}
$$

where

$$
\begin{aligned}
\mathrm{TR}_{I}= & \text { the total return of the index portfolio (as a decimal number) } \\
V_{P R I 1}= & \text { the value of the price return index at the end of the period } \\
V_{P R I 0}= & \text { the value of the price return index at the beginning of the period } \\
\mathrm{Inc}_{I}= & \text { the total income (dividends and/or interest) from all securities in the } \\
& \text { index held over the period }
\end{aligned}
$$

The total return of an index can also be calculated as the weighted average of total returns of the constituent securities. The total return of each constituent security in the index is calculated as:
$\mathrm{TR}_{i}=\frac{P_{1 i}-P_{0 i}+\operatorname{In} c_{i}}{P_{0 i}}$
where
$\mathrm{TR}_{i}=$ the total return of constituent security $i$ (as a decimal number)
$P_{1 i}=$ the price of constituent security $i$ at the end of the period
$P_{0 i}=$ the price of constituent security $i$ at the beginning of the period
$\mathrm{Inc}_{i}=$ the total income (dividends and/or interest) from security $i$ over the period
Because the total return of an index can be calculated as the weighted average of total returns of the constituent securities, we can express total return as:
$\mathrm{TR}_{I}=\sum_{i=1}^{N} \mathrm{w}_{i} \mathrm{TR}_{i}=\sum_{i=1}^{N} \mathrm{w}_{i}\left(\frac{P_{1 i}-P_{0 i}+\operatorname{Inc} c_{i}}{P_{0 i}}\right)$
Equation 8 can be rewritten simply as
$\mathrm{TR}_{I}=\mathrm{w}_{1} \mathrm{TR}_{1}+\mathrm{w}_{2} \mathrm{TR}_{2}+\ldots+\mathrm{w}_{N} \mathrm{TR}_{N}$
where
$\mathrm{TR}_{I}=$ the total return of the index portfolio (as a decimal number)
$\mathrm{TR}_{i}=$ the total return of constituent security $i$ (as a decimal number)
$\mathrm{w}_{i}=$ the weight of security $i$ (the fraction of the index portfolio allocated to security $i$ )
$N=$ the number of securities in the index

## Calculation of Index Values over Multiple Time Periods

The calculation of index values over multiple time periods requires geometrically linking the series of index returns. With a series of price returns for an index, we can calculate the value of the price return index with the following equation:

$$
\mathrm{V}_{P R I T}=\mathrm{V}_{P R I 0}\left(1+\mathrm{PR}_{I 1}\right)\left(1+\mathrm{PR}_{I 2}\right) \ldots\left(1+\mathrm{PR}_{I T}\right)
$$

where
$\mathrm{V}_{\text {PRI0 }}=$ the value of the price return index at inception
$\mathrm{V}_{\text {PRIT }}=$ the value of the price return index at time $t$
$\mathrm{PR}_{I T}=$ the price return (as a decimal number) on the index over period $t, t=1$, $2, \ldots, T$

For an index with an inception value set to 1,000 and price returns of 5 percent and 3 percent for Periods 1 and 2 respectively, the values of the price return index would be calculated as follows:

| Period | Return (\%) | Calculation | Ending Value |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| 0 |  | 1,000(1.00) | 1,000.00 |
| 1 | 5.00 | 1,000(1.05) | 1,050.00 |
| 2 | 3.00 | 1,000(1.05)(1.03) | 1,081.50 |

Similarly, the series of total returns for an index is used to calculate the value of the total return index with the following equation:

$$
\mathrm{V}_{T R I T}=\mathrm{V}_{T R I 0}\left(1+\mathrm{TR}_{I 1}\right)\left(1+\mathrm{TR}_{I 2}\right) \ldots\left(1+\mathrm{TR}_{I T}\right)
$$

where

$$
\begin{aligned}
\mathrm{V}_{T R I 0}= & \text { the value of the index at inception } \\
\mathrm{V}_{T R I T}= & \text { the value of the total return index at time } t \\
\mathrm{TR}_{I T}= & \text { the total return (as a decimal number) on the index over period } t, t=1,2, \\
& \ldots, T
\end{aligned}
$$

Suppose that the same index yields an additional 1.5 percent return from income in Period 1 and an additional 2.0 percent return from income in Period 2, bringing the total returns for Periods 1 and 2, respectively, to 6.5 percent and 5 percent. The values of the total return index would be calculated as follows:

| Period | Return (\%) | Calculation | Ending Value |
| :---: | :---: | :--- | :---: |
| 0 |  | $1,000(1.00)$ | $1,000.00$ |
| 1 | 6.50 | $1,000(1.065)$ | $1,065.00$ |
| 2 | 5.00 | $1,000(1.065)(1.05)$ | $1,118.25$ |

As illustrated above, as time passes, the value of the total return index, which includes the reinvestment of all dividends and/or interest received, exceeds the value of the price return index by an increasing amount.

## INDEX CONSTRUCTION

describe the choices and issues in index construction and management
compare the different weighting methods used in index construction
calculate and analyze the value and return of an index given its weighting method

Constructing and managing a security market index is similar to constructing and managing a portfolio of securities. Index providers must decide the following:

1. Which target market should the index represent?
2. Which securities should be selected from that target market?
3. How much weight should be allocated to each security in the index?
4. When should the index be rebalanced?
5. When should the security selection and weighting decision be re-examined?
