| Period | Return (\%) | Calculation | Ending Value |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| 0 |  | 1,000(1.00) | 1,000.00 |
| 1 | 5.00 | 1,000(1.05) | 1,050.00 |
| 2 | 3.00 | 1,000(1.05)(1.03) | 1,081.50 |

Similarly, the series of total returns for an index is used to calculate the value of the total return index with the following equation:

$$
\mathrm{V}_{T R I T}=\mathrm{V}_{T R I 0}\left(1+\mathrm{TR}_{I 1}\right)\left(1+\mathrm{TR}_{I 2}\right) \ldots\left(1+\mathrm{TR}_{I T}\right)
$$

where

$$
\begin{aligned}
\mathrm{V}_{T R I 0}= & \text { the value of the index at inception } \\
\mathrm{V}_{T R I T}= & \text { the value of the total return index at time } t \\
\mathrm{TR}_{I T}= & \text { the total return (as a decimal number) on the index over period } t, t=1,2, \\
& \ldots, T
\end{aligned}
$$

Suppose that the same index yields an additional 1.5 percent return from income in Period 1 and an additional 2.0 percent return from income in Period 2, bringing the total returns for Periods 1 and 2, respectively, to 6.5 percent and 5 percent. The values of the total return index would be calculated as follows:

| Period | Return (\%) | Calculation | Ending Value |
| :---: | :---: | :--- | :---: |
| 0 |  | $1,000(1.00)$ | $1,000.00$ |
| 1 | 6.50 | $1,000(1.065)$ | $1,065.00$ |
| 2 | 5.00 | $1,000(1.065)(1.05)$ | $1,118.25$ |

As illustrated above, as time passes, the value of the total return index, which includes the reinvestment of all dividends and/or interest received, exceeds the value of the price return index by an increasing amount.

## INDEX CONSTRUCTION

describe the choices and issues in index construction and management
compare the different weighting methods used in index construction
calculate and analyze the value and return of an index given its weighting method

Constructing and managing a security market index is similar to constructing and managing a portfolio of securities. Index providers must decide the following:

1. Which target market should the index represent?
2. Which securities should be selected from that target market?
3. How much weight should be allocated to each security in the index?
4. When should the index be rebalanced?
5. When should the security selection and weighting decision be re-examined?

## Target Market and Security Selection

The first decision in index construction is identifying the target market, market segment, or asset class that the index is intended to represent. The target market may be defined very broadly or narrowly. It may be based on asset class (e.g., equities, fixed income, real estate, commodities, hedge funds); geographic region (e.g., Japan, South Africa, Latin America, Europe); the exchange on which the securities are traded (e.g., Shanghai, Toronto, Tokyo), and/or other characteristics (e.g., economic sector, company size, investment style, duration, or credit quality).

The target market determines the investment universe and the securities available for inclusion in the index. Once the investment universe is identified, the number of securities and the specific securities to include in the index must be determined. The constituent securities could be nearly all those in the target market or a representative sample of the target market. Some equity indexes, such as the S\&P 500 Index and the FTSE 100, fix the number of securities included in the index and indicate this number in the name of the index. Other indexes allow the number of securities to vary to reflect changes in the target market or to maintain a certain percentage of the target market. For example, the Tokyo Stock Price Index (TOPIX) represents and includes all of the largest stocks, known as the First Section, listed on the Tokyo Stock Exchange. To be included in the First Section-and thus the TOPIX-stocks must meet certain criteria, such as the number of shares outstanding, the number of shareholders, and market capitalization. Stocks that no longer meet the criteria are removed from the First Section and also the TOPIX. Objective or mechanical rules determine the constituent securities of most, but not all, indexes. The S\&P Bombay Stock Exchange Sensitive Index, also called the S\&P BSE SENSEX and the S\&P 500, for example, use a selection committee and more subjective decision-making rules to determine constituent securities.

## Index Weighting

The weighting decision determines how much of each security to include in the index and has a substantial impact on an index's value. Index providers use a number of methods to weight the constituent securities in an index. Indexes can be price weighted, equal weighted, market-capitalization weighted, or fundamentally weighted. Each weighting method has its advantages and disadvantages.

## Price Weighting

The simplest method to weight an index and the one used by Charles Dow to construct the Dow Jones Industrial Average is price weighting. In price weighting, the weight on each constituent security is determined by dividing its price by the sum of all the prices of the constituent securities. The weight is calculated using the following formula:

$$
w_{i}^{P}=\frac{P_{i}}{\sum_{i=1}^{N} P_{i}}
$$

Exhibit 1 illustrates the values, weights, and single-period returns following inception of a price-weighted equity index with five constituent securities. The value of the price-weighted index is determined by dividing the sum of the security values (101.50) by the divisor, which is typically set at inception to equal the initial number of securities in the index. Thus, in our example, the divisor is 5 and the initial value of the index is calculated as $101.50 \div 5=20.30$.

| Exhibit 1: Example of a Price-Weighted Equity Index |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| Security | Shares in Index | BOP Price | Value (Shares $\times$ BOP Price) | BOP Weight (\%) | EOP Price | Dividends Per Share | Value (Shares $\times$ EOP Price) | Total Dividends | Price Return (\%) | Total Return (\%) | BOP Weight $\times$ Price Return (\%) | BOP Weight $\times$ Total Return (\%) | EOP Weight (\%) |
| A | 1 | 50.00 | 50.00 | 49.26 | 55.00 | 0.75 | 55.00 | 0.75 | 10.00 | 11.50 | 4.93 | 5.66 | 52.38 |
| B | 1 | 25.00 | 25.00 | 24.63 | 22.00 | 0.10 | 22.00 | 0.10 | -12.00 | -11.60 | -2.96 | -2.86 | 20.95 |
| C | 1 | 12.50 | 12.50 | 12.32 | 8.00 | 0.00 | 8.00 | 0.00 | -36.00 | -36.00 | -4.43 | -4.43 | 7.62 |
| D | 1 | 10.00 | 10.00 | 9.85 | 14.00 | 0.05 | 14.00 | 0.05 | 40.00 | 40.50 | 3.94 | 3.99 | 13.33 |
| E | 1 | 4.00 | 4.00 | 3.94 | 6.00 | 0.00 | 6.00 | 0.00 | 50.00 | 50.00 | 1.97 | 1.97 | 5.72 |
| Total |  |  | 101.50 | 100.00 |  |  | 105.00 | 0.90 |  |  | 3.45 | 4.33 | 100.00 |
| Index |  |  | 20.30 |  |  |  | 21.00 | 0.18 | 3.45 | 4.33 |  |  |  |
| Value |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |

Divisor = 5
BOP $=$ Beginning of period
EOP $=$ End of period

| Type of Index | BOP Value | Return (\%) | EOP Value |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| Price Return | 20.30 | 3.45 | 21.00 |
| Total Return | 20.30 | 4.33 | 21.18 |

As illustrated in this exhibit, Security A, which has the highest price, also has the highest weighting and thus will have the greatest impact on the return of the index. Note how both the price return and the total return of the index are calculated on the basis of the corresponding returns on the constituent securities.

A property unique to price-weighted indexes is that a stock split on one constituent security changes the weights on all the securities in the index. ${ }^{1}$ To prevent the stock split and the resulting new weights from changing the value of the index, the index provider must adjust the value of the divisor as illustrated in Exhibit 2. Given a 2-for-1 split in Security A, the divisor is adjusted by dividing the sum of the constituent prices after the split (77.50) by the value of the index before the split (21.00). This adjustment results in changing the divisor from 5 to 3.69 so that the index value is maintained at 21.00.

The primary advantage of price weighting is its simplicity. The main disadvantage of price weighting is that it results in arbitrary weights for each security. In particular, a stock split in any one security causes arbitrary changes in the weights of all the constituents' securities.

## Exhibit 2: Impact of 2-for-1 Split in Security A

| Security | Price before Split | Weight before Split (\%) | Price after Split | Weight after Split (\%) |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| A | 55.00 | 52.38 | 27.50 | 35.48 |
| B | 22.00 | 20.95 | 22.00 | 28.39 |
| C | 8.00 | 7.62 | 8.00 | 10.32 |
| D | 14.00 | 13.33 | 14.00 | 18.07 |
| E | 6.00 | 5.72 | 6.00 | 7.74 |
| Total | 105.00 | 100.00 | 77.50 | 100.00 |
| Divisor | 5.00 |  | 3.69 |  |
| Index Value | 21.00 |  | 21.00 |  |

## Equal Weighting

Another simple index weighting method is equal weighting. This method assigns an equal weight to each constituent security at inception. The weights are calculated as:

$$
\mathrm{w}_{i}^{\mathrm{E}}=\frac{1}{N}
$$

where
$\mathrm{w}_{i}=$ fraction of the portfolio that is allocated to security $i$ or weight of security $i$
$N=$ number of securities in the index
To construct an equal-weighted index from the five securities in Exhibit 1, the index provider allocates one-fifth ( 20 percent) of the value of the index (at the beginning of the period) to each security. Dividing the value allocated to each security by each security's individual share price determines the number of shares of each security to include in the index. Unlike a price-weighted index, where the weights are arbitrarily determined by the market prices, the weights in an equal-weighted index are arbitrarily assigned by the index provider.

[^0]Exhibit 3 illustrates the values, weights, and single-period returns following inception of an equal-weighted index with the same constituent securities as those in Exhibit 1. This example assumes a beginning index portfolio value of 10,000 (i.e., an investment of 2,000 in each security). To set the initial value of the index to 1,000 , the divisor is set to $10(10,000 \div 10=1,000)$.
Exhibit 1 and Exhibit 3 demonstrate how different weighting methods result in different returns. The 10.4 percent price return of the equal-weighted index shown in Exhibit 3 differs significantly from the 3.45 percent price return of the price-weighted index in Exhibit 1.

Like price weighting, the primary advantage of equal weighting is its simplicity. Equal weighting, however, has a number of disadvantages. First, securities that constitute the largest fraction of the target market value are underrepresented, and securities that constitute a small fraction of the target market value are overrepresented. Second, after the index is constructed and the prices of constituent securities change, the index is no longer equally weighted. Therefore, maintaining equal weights requires frequent adjustments (rebalancing) to the index.

## Market-Capitalization Weighting

In market-capitalization weighting, or value weighting, the weight on each constituent security is determined by dividing its market capitalization by the total market capitalization (the sum of the market capitalization) of all the securities in the index. Market capitalization or value is calculated by multiplying the number of shares outstanding by the market price per share.

The market-capitalization weight of security $i$ is:

$$
\mathrm{w}_{i}^{\mathrm{M}}=\frac{\mathrm{Q}_{i} \mathrm{P}_{i}}{\sum_{j=1}^{N} \mathrm{Q}_{j} \mathrm{P}_{j}}
$$

where
$\mathrm{w}_{i}=$ fraction of the portfolio that is allocated to security $i$ or weight of security $i$
$\mathrm{Q}_{i}=$ number of shares outstanding of security $i$
$\mathrm{P}_{i}=$ share price of security $i$
$N=$ number of securities in the index
Exhibit 4 illustrates the values, weights, and single-period returns following inception of a market-capitalization-weighted index for the same five-security market. Security A, with 3,000 shares outstanding and a price of 50 per share, has a market capitalization of 150,000 or 26.29 percent $(150,000 / 570,500)$ of the entire index portfolio. The resulting index weights in the exhibit reflect the relative value of each security as measured by its market capitalization.
As shown in Exhibit 1, Exhibit 3, and Exhibit 4, the weighting method affects the index's returns. The price and total returns of the market-capitalization index in Exhibit 4 (1.49 percent and 2.13 percent, respectively) differ significantly from those of the price-weighted ( 3.45 percent and 4.33 percent, respectively) and equal-weighted (10.40 percent and 10.88 percent respectively) indexes. To understand the source and magnitude of the difference, compare the weights and returns of each security under each of the weighting methods. The weight of Security A, for example, ranges from 49.26 percent in the price-weighted index to 20 percent in the equal-weighted index. With a price return of 10 percent, Security A contributes 4.93 percent to the price return of the price-weighted index, 2.00 percent to the price return of the equal-weighted index, and 2.63 percent to the price return of the market-capitalization-weighted index. With
Exhibit 3: Example of an Equal-Weighted Equity Index

| Security | Shares in Index | BOP Price | Value (Shares $\times$ BOP Price) | Weight (\%) | EOP Price | Dividends Per Share | Value (Shares $\times$ EOP Price) | Total Dividends | Price Return (\%) | Total Return (\%) | Weight $\times$ Price Return (\%) | Weight $\times$ Total Return (\%) | EOP Weight (\%) |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| A | 40 | 50.00 | 2,000 | 20.00 | 55.00 | 0.75 | 2,200 | 30 | 10.00 | 11.50 | 2.00 | 2.30 | 19.93 |
| B | 80 | 25.00 | 2,000 | 20.00 | 22.00 | 0.10 | 1,760 | 8 | -12.00 | -11.60 | -2.40 | -2.32 | 15.94 |
| C | 160 | 12.50 | 2,000 | 20.00 | 8.00 | 0.00 | 1,280 | 0 | -36.00 | -36.00 | -7.20 | -7.20 | 11.60 |
| D | 200 | 10.00 | 2,000 | 20.00 | 14.00 | 0.05 | 2,800 | 10 | 40.00 | 40.50 | 8.00 | 8.10 | 25.36 |
| E | 500 | 4.00 | 2,000 | 20.00 | 6.00 | 0.00 | 3,000 | 0 | 50.00 | 50.00 | 10.00 | 10.00 | 27.17 |
| Total |  |  | 10,000 | 100.00 |  |  | 11,040 | 48 |  |  | 10.40 | 10.88 | 100.00 |
| Index Value |  |  | 1,000 |  |  |  | 1,104 | 4.80 | 10.40 | 10.88 |  |  |  |

Divisor = 10
BOP = Beginning of period
EOP = End of period

| Type of Index | BOP Value | Return (\%) | EOP Value |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| Price Return | 1,000.00 | 10.40 | 1,104.00 |
| Total Return | 1,000.00 | 10.88 | 1,108.80 |

Exhibit 4: Example of a Market-Capitalization-Weighted Equity Index

| Stock | Shares Out-standing | BOP Price | BOP Market Cap | BOP Weight (\%) | EOP Price | Dividends Per Share | EOP Market Cap | Total Dividends | Price Return (\%) | Total Return (\%) | BOP Weight $\times$ Price Return (\%) | BOP Weight $\times$ Total Return (\%) | EOP Weight (\%) |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| A | 3,000 | 50.00 | 150,000 | 26.29 | 55.00 | 0.75 | 165,000 | 2,250 | 10.00 | 11.50 | 2.63 | 3.02 | 28.50 |
| B | 10,000 | 25.00 | 250,000 | 43.82 | 22.00 | 0.10 | 220,000 | 1,000 | -12.00 | -11.60 | -5.26 | -5.08 | 38.00 |
| C | 5,000 | 12.50 | 62,500 | 10.96 | 8.00 | 0.00 | 40,000 | 0 | -36.00 | -36.00 | -3.95 | -3.95 | 6.91 |
| D | 8,000 | 10.00 | 80,000 | 14.02 | 14.00 | 0.05 | 112,000 | 400 | 40.00 | 40.50 | 5.61 | 5.68 | 19.34 |
| E | 7,000 | 4.00 | 28,000 | 4.91 | 6.00 | 0.00 | 42,000 | 0 | 50.00 | 50.00 | 2.46 | 2.46 | 7.25 |
| Total |  |  | 570,500 | 100.00 |  |  | 579,000 | 3,650 |  |  | 1.49 | 2.13 | 100.00 |
| Index Value |  |  | 1,000 |  |  |  | 1,014.90 | 6.40 | 1.49 | 2.13 |  |  |  |
| Divisor $=570.50$ <br> BOP $=$ Beginning of period <br> EOP $=$ End of period |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |


| Type of Index | BOP Value | Return (\%) | EOP Value |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| Price Return | 1,000.00 | 1.49 | 1,014.90 |
| Total Return | 1,000.00 | 2.13 | 1,021.30 |

a total return of 11.50 percent, Security A contributes 5.66 percent to the total return of the price-weighted index, 2.30 percent to the total return of the equal-weighted index, and 3.02 percent to the total return of the market-capitalization-weighted index.

## Float-Adjusted Market-Capitalization Weighting

In float-adjusted market-capitalization weighting, the weight on each constituent security is determined by adjusting its market capitalization for its market float. Typically, market float is the number of shares of the constituent security that are available to the investing public. For companies that are closely held, only a portion of the shares outstanding are available to the investing public (the rest are held by a small group of controlling investors). In addition to excluding shares held by controlling shareholders, most float-adjusted market-capitalization-weighted indexes also exclude shares held by other corporations and governments. Some providers of indexes that are designed to represent the investment opportunities of global investors further reduce the number of shares included in the index by excluding shares that are not available to foreigner investors. The index providers may refer to these indexes as "free-float-adjusted market-capitalization-weighted indexes."

Float-adjusted market-capitalization-weighted indexes reflect the shares available for public trading by multiplying the market price per share by the number of shares available to the investing public (i.e., the float-adjusted market capitalization) rather than the total number of shares outstanding (total market capitalization). Currently, most market-capitalization-weighted indexes are float adjusted. Therefore, unless otherwise indicated, for the remainder of this reading, "market-capitalization" weighting refers to float-adjusted market-capitalization weighting.

The float-adjusted market-capitalization weight of security $i$ is calculated as:

$$
\mathrm{w}_{i}^{\mathrm{M}}=\frac{\mathrm{f}_{i} \mathrm{Q}_{i} \mathrm{P}_{i}}{\sum_{j=1}^{N} \mathrm{f}_{j} \mathrm{Q}_{j} \mathrm{P}_{j}}
$$

where
$\mathrm{f}_{i}=$ fraction of shares outstanding in the market float
$\mathrm{w}_{i}=$ fraction of the portfolio that is allocated to security $i$ or weight of security $i$
$\mathrm{Q}_{i}=$ number of shares outstanding of security $i$
$\mathrm{P}_{i}=$ share price of security $i$
$N=$ number of securities in the index
Exhibit 5 illustrates the values, weights, and single-period returns following inception of a float-adjusted market-capitalization-weighted equity index using the same five securities as before. The low percentage of shares of Security D in the market float compared with the number of shares outstanding indicates that the security is closely held.
The primary advantage of market-capitalization weighting (including float adjusted) is that constituent securities are held in proportion to their value in the target market. The primary disadvantage is that constituent securities whose prices have risen the most (or fallen the most) have a greater (or lower) weight in the index (i.e., as a security's price rises relative to other securities in the index, its weight increases; and as its price decreases in value relative to other securities in the index, its weight decreases). This weighting method leads to overweighting stocks that have risen in price (and may be overvalued) and underweighting stocks that have declined in price (and may be undervalued). The effect of this weighting method is similar to a momentum investment strategy in that over time, the securities that have risen in price the most will have the largest weights in the index.
Exhibit 5: Example of Float-Adjusted Market-Capitalization-Weighted Equity Index

| Stock | Shares Out-standing | \% Shares in Market Float | Shares in Index | BOP Price | BOP FloatAdjusted Market Cap | BOP Weight (\%) | EOP Price | Dividends Per Share | Ending FloatAdjusted Market Cap | Total Dividends | Price Return (\%) | Total Return (\%) | BOP Weight $\times$ Price Return (\%) | BOP Weight $\times$ Total Return (\%) | EOP Weight (\%) |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| A | 3,000 | 100 | 3,000 | 50.00 | 150,000 | 35.40 | 55.00 | 0.75 | 165,000 | 2,250 | 10.00 | 11.50 | 3.54 | 4.07 | 39.61 |
| B | 10,000 | 70 | 7,000 | 25.00 | 175,000 | 41.31 | 22.00 | 0.10 | 154,000 | 700 | -12.00 | -11.60 | -4.96 | -4.79 | 36.97 |
| C | 5,000 | 90 | 4,500 | 12.50 | 56,250 | 13.28 | 8.00 | 0.00 | 36,000 | 0 | -36.00 | -36.00 | -4.78 | -4.78 | 8.64 |
| D | 8,000 | 25 | 2,000 | 10.00 | 20,000 | 4.72 | 14.00 | 0.05 | 28,000 | 100 | 40.00 | 40.50 | 1.89 | 1.91 | 6.72 |
| E | 7,000 | 80 | 5,600 | 4.00 | 22,400 | 5.29 | 6.00 | 0.00 | 33,600 | 0 | 50.00 | 50.00 | 2.65 | 2.65 | 8.06 |
| Total |  |  |  |  | 423,650 | 100.00 |  |  | 416,600 | 3,050 |  |  | -1.66 | -0.94 | 100.00 |
| Index |  |  |  |  | 1,000 |  |  |  | 983.36 | 7.20 | -1.66 | -0.94 |  |  |  |
| Value |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |

Divisor $=423.65$
BOP $=$ Beginning of period
EOP $=$ End of period

| Type of Index | Initial Value | Return (\%) | Ending Value |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| Price Return | 1,000.00 | -1.66 | 983.36 |
| Total Return | 1,000.00 | -0.94 | 990.56 |

## Fundamental Weighting

Fundamental weighting attempts to address the disadvantages of market-capitalization weighting by using measures of a company's size that are independent of its security price to determine the weight on each constituent security. These measures include book value, cash flow, revenues, earnings, dividends, and number of employees.

Some fundamental indexes use a single measure, such as total dividends, to weight the constituent securities, whereas others combine the weights from several measures to form a composite value that is used for weighting.

Letting $F_{i}$ denote a given fundamental size measure of company $i$, the fundamental weight on security $i$ is:

$$
\mathrm{w}_{i}^{\mathrm{F}}=\frac{\mathrm{F}_{i}}{\sum_{j=1}^{N} \mathrm{~F}_{j}}
$$

Relative to a market-capitalization-weighted index, a fundamental index with weights based on such an item as earnings will result in greater weights on constituent securities with earnings yields (earnings divided by price) that are higher than the earnings yield of the overall market-weighted portfolio. Similarly, stocks with earnings yields less than the yield on the overall market-weighted portfolio will have lower weights. For example, suppose there are two stocks in an index. Stock A has a market capitalization of $€ 200$ million, Stock B has a market capitalization of $€ 800$ million, and their aggregate market capitalization is $€ 1$ billion ( $€ 1,000$ million). Both companies have earnings of $€ 20$ million and aggregate earnings of $€ 40$ million. Thus, Stock A has an earnings yield of 10 percent ( $20 / 200$ ) and Stock B has an earnings yield of 2.5 percent (20/800). The earnings weight of Stock A is 50 percent (20/40), which is higher than its market-capitalization weight of 20 percent (200/1,000). The earnings weight of Stock B is 50 percent (20/40), which is less than its market-capitalization weight of 80 percent ( $800 / 1,000$ ). Relative to the market-cap-weighted index, the earnings-weighted index over-weights the high-yield Stock A and under-weights the low-yield Stock B.

The most important property of fundamental weighting is that it leads to indexes that have a "value" tilt. That is, a fundamentally weighted index has ratios of book value, earnings, dividends, etc. to market value that are higher than its market-capitalization-weighted counterpart. Also, in contrast to the momentum "effect" of market-capitalization-weighted indexes, fundamentally weighted indexes generally will have a contrarian "effect" in that the portfolio weights will shift away from securities that have increased in relative value and toward securities that have fallen in relative value whenever the portfolio is rebalanced.

## INDEX MANAGEMENT: REBALANCING AND RECONSTITUTION

describe rebalancing and reconstitution of an index

So far, we have discussed index construction. Index management entails the two remaining questions:

- When should the index be rebalanced?
- When should the security selection and weighting decisions be re-examined?


[^0]:    1 A stock split is an increase in the number of shares outstanding and a proportionate decrease in the price per share such that the total market value of equity, as well as investors' proportionate ownership in the company, does not change.

