## C. 195 .

## Solution:

B is correct.

$$
\begin{aligned}
& 2 X 20 \text { operating income }=0.02(8,411)=168 \\
& 2 X 20 \text { depreciation expense }=0.20(768)=154 \\
& \text { EBITDA }=168+154=322 \\
& \text { Debt }=0.50(322)=161
\end{aligned}
$$

4. The analyst notes that Iliso's common stock and paid-in capital accounts increased, in total, by 75 million from 2X18 to 2X19, but only 42 million was reported as stock issuance on the statement of cash flows. Retained earnings increased by the amount of net income. Which of the following most likely explains the difference of 33 million?
A. A stock split
B. A stock dividend

## C. Stock-based compensation

## Solution:

C is correct. Stock-based compensation is a non-cash expense in the income statement and is reported as an addition to net income in the indirect method of reporting cash flow from operations. The issuance also increases common stock and paid-in capital. A stock split typically simply increases the number of shares outstanding and decreases any stated par value per share. A stock dividend increases common stock and paid-in capital and reduces retained earnings by the same amount.

## SCENARIO ANALYSIS

$$
\square \quad \text { describe the use of scenario analysis in forecasting }
$$

Recall from earlier lessons that industry and business risks may result in future outcomes that differ from expectations. The final step in forecasting involves incorporating the possibility of different outcomes based on key risk factors as well as judging their likelihood of occurrence. Generic risk factors that affect all companies-but to varying degrees-include changes in the business cycle, competition, inflation and deflation, and technological developments. Rather than develop single point estimate forecasts, analysts make several forecast scenarios that vary based on different outcomes with respect to key risk factors. Investors compare these scenarios with other analysts' (e.g., sell-side analysts) forecasts for a company, as well as forecasts implied by current valuations, to make investment decisions.

We demonstrate the use of scenario analysis for technological developments that threaten to cannibalize demand for an existing product in the following historical case study. Technological developments can affect demand for a product, the quantity supplied of a product, or both. When changes in technology lead to lower manufacturing
costs, the supply curve will shift to the right as suppliers produce more of the product at the same price. Conversely, if changes in technology result in the development of attractive substitute products, the demand curve will shift to the left.

## EXAMPLE 4

## Quantifying the Tablet Market's Potential to Cannibalize Demand for Personal Computers

The worldwide tablet market experienced a major technological development with the introduction of the Apple iPad tablet in April 2010, which was expected to have (and indeed did have) important implications for the manufacturers of desktop and laptop computers. A tablet promised to offer the capabilities of a portable personal computer (PC) with a touchscreen interface instead of a keyboard. Another distinguishing feature of the then-new tablets was that-unlike the majority of PCs, which run on the Microsoft Windows platform-they would run on a non-Microsoft operating system: Apple's iOS or Google's Android. Given the tablet's ability to perform many of the most common tasks of a PCincluding emailing, browsing the web, sharing photos, playing music, watching movies, playing games, keeping a calendar, and managing contacts-an analyst at that time might reasonably have wondered to what extent sales of tablets might cannibalize demand for PCs and what the potential impact might be on Microsoft's sales and earnings. Exhibit 13 presents one approach to answering these questions. It is set at the start of 2012, just over a year after the launch of the iPad. It is presented from the position of an analyst assessing the impact of the tablet on the PC market and Microsoft.

```
Exhibit 13: Unit and Revenue Projections (in thousands, unless
noted)
```

| Pre-Cannibalization PC Projections | FY2011 | FY2012E | FY2013E | FY2014E | 3-Year CAGR |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| Consumer PC shipments | 170,022 | 174,430 | 184,120 | 193,811 | 4.5\% |
| Non-consumer PC shipments | 180,881 | 185,570 | 195,880 | 206,189 | 4.5\% |
| Total global PC shipments | 350,903 | 360,000 | 380,000 | 400,000 | 4.5\% |
| \% of which is consumer | 48\% | 48\% | 48\% | 48\% |  |
| \% of which is non-consumer | 52\% | 52\% | 52\% | 52\% |  |
| Consumer tablet shipments | 36,785 | 82,800 | 111,250 | 148,750 | 59.3\% |
| Non-consumer tablet shipments | 1,686 | 7,200 | 13,750 | 26,250 | 149.7\% |
| Total global tablet shipments | 38,471 | 90,000 | 125,000 | 175,000 | 65.7\% |
| \% of which is consumer | 96\% | 92\% | 89\% | 85\% |  |
| \% of which is non-consumer | 4\% | 8\% | 11\% | 15\% |  |


| Pre-Cannibalization PC Projections | FY2011 | FY2012E | FY2013E | FY2014E | 3-Year CAGR |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| Cannibalization factor, consumer | 30\% | 30\% | 30\% | 30\% |  |
| Cannibalization factor, non-consumer | 10\% | 10\% | 10\% | 10\% |  |
| \# of consumer PCs cannibalized by tablets | 11,036 | 24,840 | 33,375 | 44,625 |  |
| \# of non-consumer PCs cannibalized by tablets | 169 | 720 | 1,375 | 2,625 |  |
| Total PCs cannibalized by tablets | 11,205 | 25,560 | 34,750 | 47,250 |  |
| \% of total PCs cannibalized by tablets | 3.2\% | 7.1\% | 9.1\% | 11.8\% |  |
| Post-Cannibalization PC Projections |  |  |  |  |  |
| Consumer PC shipments | 158,987 | 149,590 | 150,745 | 149,186 | -2.1\% |
| Non-consumer PC shipments | 180,712 | 184,850 | 194,505 | 203,564 | 4.0\% |
| Total global PC shipments | 339,699 | 334,440 | 345,250 | 352,750 | 1.3\% |
| Microsoft implied average selling price (USD) |  |  |  |  |  |
| Consumer | 85 | 85 | 85 | 85 |  |
| Non-consumer | 155 | 155 | 155 | 155 |  |
| Revenue impact for Microsoft (USD millions) |  |  |  |  |  |
| Consumer | 938 | 2,111 | 2,837 | 3,793 |  |
| Non-consumer | 26 | 112 | 213 | 407 |  |
| Total revenue impact | 964 | 2,223 | 3,050 | 4,200 |  |

Note: CAGR is compound annual growth rate. Non-consumer includes enterprise, education, and government purchasers.

Sources: Based on data from Gartner, JPMorgan, Microsoft, and authors' analysis.
Worldwide market shipments of PCs in FY2011 totaled 350.9 million units, while worldwide shipments of tablets totaled 38.5 million units (source: Gartner Personal Computer Quarterly Statistics Worldwide Database). Shipments to consumers represented $96 \%$ of total tablet shipments during fiscal year 2011. We next estimate the magnitude of the potential substitution effect, or cannibalization factor, that tablets will have on the PC market. Because the cannibalization factor depends on many different variables-including user preferences, end-use application, and whether the purchaser already owns a PC-we use a range of potential estimates. Moreover, we also divide the worldwide PC market into consumer and non-consumer (enterprise, education, and government purchasers), because the degree of substitution is likely to differ between the two. For purposes of illustration, we assume a cannibalization factor of $30 \%$ for the consumer market and $10 \%$ for the non-consumer market in our base case scenario.

In addition, the base case scenario assumes that non-consumer adoption of tablets increases to $15 \%$ of the market from $4 \%$ in 2011. Moreover, although the composition of the global PC market is roughly evenly divided between consumers and non-consumers ( $48 \%$ and $52 \%$ in fiscal year 2011, respectively), the non-consumer segment is significantly more profitable for Microsoft, because approximately $80 \%$ of the company's Office products are sold to enterprise, education, and government institutions. The average selling price (ASP) estimates are derived by dividing Microsoft's estimated average revenue by customer type for the prior three years by Microsoft's estimated PC shipments for each type of customer. By multiplying the projected number of PCs cannibalized by tablets by the estimated ASP, we can derive an estimate of the revenue impact for Microsoft. For example, in FY2012, it is projected that 24.8 million consumer PCs will be cannibalized by sales of tablets. With a consumer ASP of USD85, this cannibalization implies a revenue loss for Microsoft of USD2.1 billion (24.8 million units $\times$ USD85 per unit $=$ USD2.1 billion).

Once the revenue impact has been projected, the next step is to estimate the impact of lower PC unit volumes on operating costs and margins. We begin by analyzing the cost structure of Microsoft and, more specifically, the breakdown between fixed and variable costs. Most software companies have a cost structure with a relatively high proportion of fixed costs and a low proportion of variable costs, because costs related to product development and marketing (mostly fixed) are sunk and unrecoverable, whereas the cost of producing an additional copy of the software (mostly variable) is relatively low. Because very few, if any, companies provide an explicit breakdown of fixed versus variable costs, an estimate almost always needs to be made. One method is to use the formula
$\% \Delta$ (Cost of revenue + Operating expenses) $/ \% \Delta$ revenue,
where $\% \Delta$ is "percentage change in," used as a proxy for variable cost percentage. Another approach is to assign an estimate of the percentage of fixed and variable costs to the various components of operating expenses. The two approaches are illustrated in Exhibit 14 and Exhibit 15.

## Exhibit 14: Estimation of Variable Costs for Microsoft, Method 1 (USD millions)

| Selected Operating Segments | FY2009 | FY2010 | FY2011 | FY2011/FY2009 Percentage Change |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| Revenue: |  |  |  |  |
| Windows and Windows Live | 15,563 | 18,792 | 18,778 |  |
| Microsoft business division | 19,211 | 19,345 | 21,986 |  |
| Total segment revenue | 34,774 | 38,137 | 40,764 | 17\% |
| Operating expenses: |  |  |  |  |
| Windows and |  |  |  |  |
| Windows Live | 6,191 | 6,539 | 6,810 |  |


| Selected Operating Segments | FY2009 | FY2010 | FY2011 | FY2011/FY2009 Percentage Change |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| Microsoft business division | 8,058 | 7,703 | 8,159 |  |
| Total operating expenses | 14,249 | 14,242 | 14,969 | 5\% |

$\%$ Variable cost estimate $\approx \% \Delta$ (Cost of revenue + Operating expenses) $/ \% \Delta$ revenue $\approx 5 \% / 17 \% \approx 29 \%$
$\%$ Fixed cost $\approx 1-\%$ Variable cost $\approx 1-29 \% \approx \mathbf{7 1 \%}$

Exhibit 15: Estimation of Variable Costs for Microsoft, Method 2 (USD millions)

| Operating Expenses | FY2009 | FY2010 | FY2011 | FY2009FY2011 Average | \% of Total Op. Expenses | Estimated \% of Fixed Costs | Fixed Cost Contribution |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| Cost of revenue (excl. depreciation) | 10,455 | 10,595 | 13,577 | 11,542 | 29\% | 20\% | 6\% |
| Depreciation expense | 1,700 | 1,800 | 2,000 | 1,833 | 5\% | 100\% | 5\% |
| Total cost of revenue | 12,155 | 12,395 | 15,577 | 13,376 | 34\% |  | 10\% |
| R\&D | 9,010 | 8,714 | 9,043 | 8,922 | 22\% | 100\% | 22\% |
| Sales and marketing | 12,879 | 13,214 | 13,940 | 13,344 | 34\% | 80\% | 27\% |
| General and admin. | 4,030 | 4,063 | 4,222 | 4,105 | 10\% | 100\% | 10\% |
| Total operating expenses | 38,074 | 38,386 | 42,782 | 39,747 | 100\% |  | 60\% |
| Estimated percentage of Microsoft's total cost structure that is fixed: |  |  |  |  |  |  | 70\% |

Note: Fiscal year ends in June.

Sources: Microsoft 2011 Form 10-K and authors' analysis.
As can be seen, Microsoft's cost structure appears to consist of approximately $70 \%$ fixed costs and $30 \%$ variable costs. Note, however, that a growing company like Microsoft will typically re-invest in PP\&E to support future growth, so even those expenses that appear to be "fixed" will increase over time. To adjust for this expected growth in fixed costs, this example includes an assumption that the change in fixed costs will be half the rate of the change in sales. Variable costs are projected to change at the same rate as sales. As shown in Exhibit 16, after incorporating these assumptions into the projections, an assumed $7.0 \%$ compound annual growth rate (CAGR) in revenue through FY2014 would translate into a $10.6 \%$ CAGR in operating income $\left[(36,757 / 27,161)^{1 / 3}-1=0.106\right.$, or $10.6 \%]$. In addition, these assumptions would result in an operating margin expansion of 410 bps over the same period ( $42.9 \%-38.8 \%=4.1 \mathrm{pps}$, or 410 bps ), because of the significant amount of operating leverage that exists as a result of
a relatively large fixed cost base. With the further assumptions of no change in other income, a constant effective tax rate, and no change in shares outstanding, the pre-cannibalization model, shown in Exhibit 16, results in projected revenue of USD85.7 billion, operating income of USD36.8 billion, an operating margin of $42.9 \%$, and EPS that increases at a CAGR of $10.3 \%$ to USD3.62 in FY2014.

Exhibit 16: Microsoft Pre-Cannibalization EPS Projections (USD millions, except EPS)

|  | FY2011 | FY2012E | FY2013E | FY2014E | 3-Year CAGR |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| Revenue | 69,943 | 74,839 | 80,078 | 85,683 | 7.0\% |
| YoY\% |  | 7.0\% | 7.0\% | 7.0\% |  |
| Operating Expenses |  |  |  |  |  |
| Fixed (70\%) | 29,947 | 30,996 | 32,080 | 33,203 | 3.5\% |
| Variable (30\%) | 12,835 | 13,733 | 14,694 | 15,723 | 7.0\% |
| Total operating expenses | 42,782 | 44,729 | 46,774 | 48,926 | 4.6\% |
| Operating income | 27,161 | 30,110 | 33,303 | 36,757 | 10.6\% |
| Operating margin | 38.83\% | 40.23\% | 41.59\% | 42.90\% |  |
| Other income (expense) | 910 | 910 | 910 | 910 |  |
| Pre-tax income | 28,071 | 31,020 | 34,213 | 37,667 |  |
| Provision for income taxes | 4,921 | 5,438 | 5,998 | 6,603 |  |
| Effective tax rate | 17.53\% | 17.53\% | 17.53\% | 17.53\% |  |
| Net income | 23,150 | 25,582 | 28,215 | 31,064 |  |
| Weighted average shares outstanding, diluted | 8,593 | 8,593 | 8,593 | 8,593 |  |
| Estimated EPS pre-cannibalization | 2.69 | 2.98 | 3.28 | 3.62 | 10.3\% |

In the post-cannibalization scenario, as shown in Exhibit 17, revenue is reduced each year to reflect the expected impact of cannibalization, which results in a decrease in the CAGR of revenue over the period to $5.2 \%$, down from $7.0 \%$ in the pre-cannibalization scenario. Given the reduction in revenue growth and holding the cost structure constant at 70/30 fixed versus variable costs, operating income growth slows to a CAGR of $8.0 \%$, down from $10.6 \%$ in the pre-cannibalization scenario. Operating margin at the end of the period is reduced by approximately 100 bps, from $42.9 \%$ to $41.9 \%$, because the company is unable to leverage its fixed cost base to the same degree as a result of slower revenue growth. Overall, in the post-cannibalization scenario, Microsoft is expected to generate revenue of USD81.5 billion, operating income of USD34.2 billion, an operating margin of $41.9 \%$, and EPS that increases at a CAGR of $7.7 \%$
to USD3.37 in FY2014. Thus, the cannibalization of PCs as a result of projected growth in the tablet market is expected to reduce the company's annual revenues in FY2014 by USD4.2 billion, operating income by USD2.6 billion, operating margins by 96 bps, and EPS by USD0.25.

Exhibit 17: Microsoft Post-Cannibalization EPS Projections, Base Case Scenario (USD millions, except EPS and unless noted)

|  | FY2011 | FY2012E | FY2013E | FY2014E | 3-Year CAGR |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| Revenue | 69,943 | 72,616 | 77,028 | 81,483 | 5.2\% |
| YoY\% |  | 3.8\% | 6.1\% | 5.8\% |  |
| Operating Expenses |  |  |  |  |  |
| Fixed (70\%) | 29,947 | 30,520 | 31,447 | 32,356 | 2.6\% |
| Variable (30\%) | 12,835 | 13,325 | 14,135 | 14,952 | 5.2\% |
| Total operating expenses | 42,782 | 43,845 | 45,581 | 47,308 | 3.4\% |
| Operating income | 27,161 | 28,771 | 31,446 | 34,175 | 8.0\% |
| Operating margin | 38.83\% | 39.62\% | 40.82\% | 41.94\% |  |
| Other income (expense) | 910 | 910 | 910 | 910 |  |
| Pre-tax income | 28,071 | 29,681 | 32,356 | 35,085 |  |
| Provision for income taxes | 4,921 | 5,203 | 5,672 | 6,151 |  |
| Effective tax rate | 17.53\% | 17.53\% | 17.53\% | 17.53\% |  |
| Net income | 23,150 | 24,478 | 26,684 | 28,934 |  |
| Weighted average shares outstanding, diluted | 8,593 | 8,593 | 8,593 | 8,593 |  |
| Estimated EPS post-cannibalization | 2.69 | 2.85 | 3.11 | 3.37 | 7.7\% |
| Compared with pre-cannibalization: |  |  |  |  |  |
| Estimated impact on operating margin |  | -61 bps | -77 bps | -96 bps |  |
| Estimated impact on EPS (USD) |  | -0.13 | -0.17 | -0.25 | -2.6\% |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |

## KNOWLEDGE CHECK

Answer the following questions using the data from the exhibits on Microsoft:

1. Estimate post-cannibalization global PC shipments in FY2012 assuming a cannibalization factor of $40 \%$ for consumers and $15 \%$ for non-consumers.

## Solution:

The number of PCs cannibalized by tablets is equal to the product of the expected number of global tablet shipments, the percentage representation of each category, and the cannibalization factor for the category. Tablet
shipments in FY2012 are projected to be 90 million units; ( 90 million tablets $\times 92 \%$ consumer representation $\times 40 \%$ consumer cannibalization factor $=$ 33.12 million consumer PCs cannibalized by tablets) + (90 million tablets $\times 8 \%$ non-consumer representation $\times 15 \%$ cannibalization $=1.08$ million non-consumer PCs cannibalized by tablets) $=34.2$ million total PCs cannibalized by tablets. Post-cannibalization shipments are equal to pre-cannibalization shipments minus expected cannibalization, or 360 million - 34.2 million $=325.8$ million.
2. Using the results derived in Question 1, estimate the post-cannibalization revenue in FY2012 for Microsoft.

## Solution:

The estimated impact on revenue is equal to the product of the number of PCs cannibalized and the ASP. Using the results obtained in Question 1 and the ASP data, the expected revenue impact can be calculated as ( 33.12 million consumer PCs cannibalized by tablets $\times$ USD85 ASP $=$ USD2.815 billion) $+(1.08$ million non-consumer PCs cannibalized by tablets $\times$ USD155 ASP $=$ USD167.4 million) $=$ USD2.983 billion total impact on revenue for Microsoft. Post-cannibalization revenue is equal to pre-cannibalization revenue minus the estimated impact of cannibalization on revenue, or USD74.839 billion - USD2.983 billion = USD71.856 billion.
3. Using the estimate for post-cannibalization revenue derived in Question 2 and the cost structure provided, estimate post-cannibalization operating income and operating margin in FY2012 for Microsoft. Assume that fixed costs change at half the rate of the change in sales.

## Solution:

## Exhibit 18: Solution to Question 3 (USD millions)

|  | FY2011 | FY2012E | Notes |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| Revenue | 69,943 | 71,856 | Derived from Question 2 |
| YoY\% |  | 2.74\% | Rate of change in sales used to estimate operating expenses |
| Operating Expenses |  |  |  |
| Fixed (70\%) | 29,947 | 30,357 | Fixed costs change at half the rate of the change in sales, or $29,947 \times(1+2.74 \% / 2)$ |
| Variable (30\%) | 12,835 | 13,186 | Variable costs change at the same rate as the change in sales, or $12,835 \times(1+2.74 \%)$ |
| Total operating expenses | 42,782 | 43,543 | Although not shown, operating expenses include COGS |


|  | FY2011 | FY2012E | Notes |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| Operating income | 27,161 | 28,313 | Revenue minus total operating expenses, or 71,856-43,543= 28,313 |
| Operating margin | 38.8\% | 39.4\% | Operating income divided by revenue, or $28,313 / 71,856=$ 39.4\% |

Post-cannibalization operating income and operating margin in FY2012 for Microsoft are USD28,314 million and 39.4\%, respectively.
4. Using the estimate for operating income derived in Question 3 and the data in the exhibits, calculate the expected post-cannibalization EPS in FY2012 for Microsoft. Assume that other income (expense), the effective tax rate, and the diluted weighted average shares outstanding provided for FY2011 remain constant in FY2012.
Solution:

Exhibit 19: Solution to Question 4 (USD millions, except EPS and unless noted)

|  | FY2011 | FY2012E | Notes |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| Revenue | 69,943 | 71,856 |  |
| YoY\% |  | 2.74\% |  |
| Operating Expenses |  |  |  |
| Fixed (70\%) | 29,947 | 30,357 |  |
| Variable (30\%) | 12,835 | 13,186 |  |
| Total operating expenses | 42,782 | 43,543 |  |
| Operating income | 27,161 | 28,314 |  |
| Operating margin | 38.8\% | 39.4\% |  |
| Other income (expense) | 910 | 910 |  |
| Pre-tax income | 28,071 | 29,224 | Operating income + Other income (expense), or 28,314 + $910=29,224$ |
| Provision for income taxes | 4,921 | 5,123 | Pre-tax income $\times$ Effective tax rate, or $29,224 \times 17.53 \%=$ 5,123 |
| Effective tax rate | 17.53\% | 17.53\% |  |
| Net income | 23,150 | 24,101 | Pre-tax income - Provision for income taxes, or 29,224 $5,123=24,101$ |


|  | FY2011 | FY2012E | Notes |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| Weighted average shares outstanding, diluted | 8,593 | 8,593 |  |
| Estimated EPS post-cannibalization (USD) | 2.69 | 2.80 | Net income/Wtd. avg. shs. out., or $24,101 / 8,593=$ USD2.80 |

Whenever one is estimating something that depends on many different variables that are difficult to measure, we recommend altering some of the assumptions to generate a range of estimates based on various scenarios. Thus, having developed a forecast under a base case cannibalization scenario, we can analyze the sensitivity of the results by altering the cannibalization assumptions. The base case scenario corresponds to the assumptions reflected in the boxed center of the table in Exhibit 20. Exhibit 21 summarizes the results of both bull and bear case scenarios, showing the estimated FY2014 EPS under alternative estimated cannibalization factors.

Exhibit 20: Estimated FY2014 EPS Sensitivity to Changes in Cannibalization Rates (USD)

|  |  | Non-Consumer Cannibalization |  |  |  |  |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
|  |  | 0\% | 5\% | 10\% | 15\% | 20\% |
| Consumer Cannibalization | 15\% | -0.11 | -0.12 | -0.14 | -0.15 | -0.16 |
|  | 20\% | -0.15 | -0.16 | -0.17 | -0.19 | -0.20 |
|  | 25\% | -0.19 | -0.20 | -0.21 | -0.22 | -0.23 |
|  | 30\% | -0.22 | -0.24 | -0.25 | -0.26 | -0.27 |
|  | 35\% | -0.26 | -0.27 | -0.28 | -0.30 | -0.31 |
|  | 40\% | -0.30 | -0.31 | -0.32 | -0.33 | -0.35 |
|  | 45\% | -0.34 | -0.35 | -0.36 | -0.37 | -0.38 |

Exhibit 21: Post-Cannibalization EPS Projections for Bull and Bear Case Scenarios (USD millions, except EPS and unless noted)

| Bull Case Scenario (Cannibalization Factor: 15\% Consumer/5\% Non-Consumer) |  |  |  |  |  |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
|  | FY2011 | FY2012E | FY2013E | FY2014E | 3-Year CAGR |
| Revenue | 69,943 | 73,728 | 78,553 | 83,583 | 6.1\% |
| YoY\% |  | 5.4\% | 6.5\% | 6.4\% |  |
| Operating Expenses |  |  |  |  |  |
| Fixed (70\%) | 29,947 | 30,758 | 31,764 | 32,781 | 3.1\% |
| Variable (30\%) | 12,835 | 13,529 | 14,414 | 15,338 | 6.1\% |
| Total operating expenses | 42,782 | 44,287 | 46,178 | 48,119 | 4.0\% |


| Bull Case Scenario (Cannibalization Factor: 15\% Consumer/5\% Non-Consumer) |  |  |  |  |  |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
|  | FY2011 | FY2012E | FY2013E | FY2014E | 3-Year CAGR |
| Operating income | 27,161 | 29,441 | 32,374 | 35,464 | 9.3\% |
| Operating margin | 38.83\% | 39.93\% | 41.21\% | 42.43\% |  |
| Other income (expense) | 910 | 910 | 910 | 910 |  |
| Pre-tax income | 28,071 | 30,351 | 33,284 | 36,374 |  |
| Provision for income taxes | 4,921 | 5,321 | 5,835 | 6,377 |  |
| Effective tax rate | 17.53\% | 17.53\% | 17.53\% | 17.53\% |  |
| Net income | 23,150 | 25,030 | 27,449 | 29,998 |  |
| Weighted average shares outstanding, diluted | 8,593 | 8,593 | 8,593 | 8,593 |  |
| Estimated EPS post-cannibalization (USD) | 2.69 | 2.91 | 3.19 | 3.49 | 9.0\% |
| Compared with pre-cannibalization: |  |  |  |  |  |
| Estimated impact on operating margin |  | -30 bps | -38 bps | -47 bps |  |
| Estimated impact on EPS (USD) |  | -0.07 | -0.09 | -0.13 | -1.3\% |
| Bear Case Scenario (cannibalization factor: 40\% consumer, 20\% non-consumer) |  |  |  |  |  |


|  | FY2011 | FY2012E | FY2013E | FY2014E | 3-Year CAGR |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| Revenue | 69,943 | 71,801 | 75,869 | 79,812 | 4.5\% |
| YoY\% |  | 2.7\% | 5.7\% | 5.2\% |  |
| Operating Expenses |  |  |  |  |  |
| Fixed (70\%) | 29,947 | 30,345 | 31,205 | 32,016 | 2.3\% |
| Variable (30\%) | 12,835 | 13,175 | 13,922 | 14,646 | 4.5\% |
| Total operating expenses | 42,782 | 43,520 | 45,127 | 46,662 | 2.9\% |
| Operating income | 27,161 | 28,280 | 30,742 | 33,151 | 6.9\% |
| Operating margin | 38.83\% | 39.39\% | 40.52\% | 41.54\% |  |
| Other income (expense) | 910 | 910 | 910 | 910 |  |
| Pre-tax income | 28,071 | 29,190 | 31,652 | 34,061 |  |
| Provision for income taxes | 4,921 | 5,117 | 5,549 | 5,971 |  |
| Effective tax rate | 17.53\% | 17.53\% | 17.53\% | 17.53\% |  |
| Net income | 23,150 | 24,073 | 26,103 | 28,090 |  |

Bear Case Scenario (cannibalization factor: $\mathbf{4 0 \%}$ consumer, $\mathbf{2 0 \%}$ non-consumer)

|  | FY2011 | FY2012E | FY2013E | FY2014E | 3-Year CAGR |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| Weighted average shares outstanding, diluted | 8,593 | 8,593 | 8,593 | 8,593 |  |
| Estimated EPS post-cannibalization (USD) | 2.69 | 2.80 | 3.04 | 3.27 | 6.7\% |
| Compared with pre-cannibalization: |  |  |  |  |  |
| Estimated impact on operating margin |  | -84 bps | -107 bps | -136 bps |  |
| Estimated impact on EPS (USD) |  | -0.18 | -0.24 | -0.35 | -3.6\% |

## QUESTION SET

1. For which of the following companies is it most crucial for an analyst to conduct scenario analysis to estimate a decline in earnings from a recession?
A. A bank
B. A chain of large grocery stores
C. A provider of residential electricity

Solution:
A is correct, because both lending volume and interest rates typically fall in recessions, which results in declining earnings for banks. Demand for both food-at-home and residential electricity is generally not as sensitive to changes in the business cycle.
2. An analyst is preparing scenarios for a company's gross margin. Selected financial data from the prior period include the following:

Average selling price per product EUR6.50
Quantity sold (000s) 2,300
Total revenues (EUR 000s) 14,950
Cost of sales (EUR 000s) 7,475
Gross profit (EUR 000s) 7,475
Gross profit margin 50\%

If input prices increase by $20 \%$, the analyst expects the company to increase selling prices by $10 \%$, resulting in a $5 \%$ decrease in volume sold. The forecast decrease in gross profit margin is closest to:
A. $4.5 \%$
B. $7.4 \%$.
C. $15.0 \%$

Solution:
A is correct.
Average selling price $=$ EUR6.50(1.10) $=$ EUR7.15
Quantity sold in $000 \mathrm{~s}=2,300(0.95)=2,185$
Average input cost $=(7,475 / 2,300)(1.20)=$ EUR3.90
Total revenues in 000s $=2,185($ EUR7.15 $)=15,622.75$
Gross profit in 000s $=2,185($ EUR7.15 - EUR3.90 $)=7,101.25$
Gross profit margin
$=7,101.25 / 15,622.75 \approx 45.5 \%$, which is $4.5 \%$ less than $50 \%$
3. The invention of a new technology that leads to lower product manufacturing costs in a highly competitive industry is most likely to result in:
A. lower gross profit margins.
B. higher gross profit margins.
C. no impact on gross profit margins.

Solution:
C is correct. In a highly competitive industry, savings in manufacturing costs are likely to be passed on to customers through competition in the form of lower prices.

