age sales per third-party merchant to increase by $40 \%$. The analyst's forecast for Iliso's 2X20 GMV (in USD millions) is closest to:
A. 8,860 .
B. 9,210 .
C. 11,140 .

Solution:
C is correct.
Forecast of Iliso's 2X20 retail sales $=204(1.05) \times 36(1.15)=8,868$ or $=$ 7,336(1.05)(1.15)
$=8,858$
Forecast of 2X20 third-party merchant sales $=[40,500(1.28) \times$ $31,300(1.40)] / 1,000,000=2,272$ or $=1,269(1.28)(1.40)$
$=2,274$
Forecast of Iliso's 2X20 GMV $=8,868+2,272=11,140$

## FORECASTING OPERATING EXPENSES AND WORKING CAPITAL

explain approaches to forecasting a company's operating expenses and working capital

Issuers' disclosures about operating costs are typically less detailed than revenue disclosures. Rather than modeling costs separately for different geographic regions, business segments, or product lines, analysts are often forced to use more aggregated forecast objects such as consolidated financial statement lines (e.g., cost of sales, SG\&A) or summary measure like EBITDA margins on a consolidated or segment basis. The forecasts for revenues and costs should still be coherent. If sales of a relatively low-margin product, segment, or geography are forecast to grow faster than other revenues, some level of overall profit margin deterioration should be forecast, even if the analyst is uncertain about the precise margins earned on each object. For example, food and grocery typically has low gross profit margins, so an analyst of a grocery chain that also sells higher-margin items, such as alcoholic products or pharmaceutical products, would want to forecast any change in product mix sold.

## Cost of Sales and Gross Margins

Cost of sales (cost of goods sold, or COGS) is typically the single largest cost for companies that make and/or sell products. Because it has a direct link with sales, forecasting this item as a percentage of sales (or as a gross margin) is usually a good approach. If a company is losing market share to new substitute products with lower prices, gross margins are likely to decline. But if the company is gaining market share because it has introduced differentiated products-especially if it has done so in combination with achieving cost advantages-gross margins are likely to rise.

Cost of sales is typically a large cost, so even a single basis point in a gross margin forecast can have a material impact on forecasts of operating profit and free cash flow. Analysts should consider whether a more detailed analysis of these costs (e.g., by segment, input, or product line, or by volume and price components) is possible to better justify the forecast. For example, some companies face fluctuating input costs that can be passed on to customers only with a time lag. Particularly for companies with low gross margins, sudden shocks in input costs can affect operating profit significantly. A good example is the sensitivity of airlines' profits to unhedged changes in jet fuel costs. In these cases, a breakdown of both costs and sales into volume and price components is essential for developing short-term forecasts, even if analysts use the overall relationship between sales and input costs for developing longer-term forecasts, as shown in Exhibit 3.

## Exhibit 3: The Effect of Prices and Costs on Gross Profit and Margin

Assume that a company's COGS as a percentage of sales equals $25 \%$ and that the quantity sold is the same in Period 2 as in Period 1. If input costs double in Period 2 and the company can pass the entire increase on to its customers through a $25 \%$ price increase, COGS as a percentage of sales will increase (to $40 \%$ ) because an equal absolute amount has been added to the numerator and to the denominator.

|  | Period 1 | Period 2 |
| :--- | :--- | :--- |
| Sales | 100.0 | 125.0 |
| COGS | 25.0 | 50.0 |
| Gross profit | 75.0 | 75.0 |
| COGS as \% of sales | 25\% | 40\% |
| Gross margin \% | 75\% | 60\% |

Thus, although the absolute amount of gross profit will remain constant, the gross margin will decrease (from $75 \%$ to $60 \%$ ).

Analysts should incorporate a company's hedging strategy into a forecast. For example, commodity-driven companies' gross margins almost automatically decline if input prices of needed commodities increase significantly, because the variable costs increase at a faster rate than output prices. Through hedging strategies, a company can mitigate the impact on profitability. For example, brewers often hedge the cost of barley, a key raw material needed for brewing beer, one year in advance. Although companies usually do not disclose specific hedging positions, their hedging strategy is often disclosed in the notes to the financial statements. Further, the negative impact of increasing sales prices on sales volume (if product demand is price elastic) can be mitigated by a policy of gradual sales price increases. For example, if the brewer expects higher barley prices because of a poor harvest, the brewer can slowly increase prices to avoid a strong price jump next year.

While competitors' gross margins can provide a useful cross-check for forecasting gross margin, the margins may not be comparable given differences in business models. For example, some retailers own and operate their own stores, whereas other companies operate as wholesalers with franchised retail operations. In the franchise model, most of the operating costs are incurred by the franchisee; the wholesaler sells products with only a small markup to these franchisees. Compared with a retailer with its own stores, a wholesaler will have a much lower gross margin but also much lower operating costs.

## SG\&A Expenses

SG\&A expenses are the other main type of operating costs. In contrast to cost of sales, SG\&A expenses often have a less direct relationship with revenues. As an illustration of the profit impact of COGS and SG\&A, consider the case of a Thai cement and building materials company, Siam Cement Group, from 2017 to 2018. A summary of the company's key income statement items is shown in Exhibit 4.

Exhibit 4: Siam Cement Group 2017-18 Financials

|  | 2017 (THB billions) | 2018 (THB billions) | YoY\% | Percentage of Sales |  |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
|  |  |  |  | 2017 | 2018 |
| Net sales | 450.92 | 478.44 | 6.1 | 100.0 | 100.0 |
| COGS | 349.31 | 383.46 | 9.8 | 77.5 | 80.1 |
| Gross profit | 101.61 | 94.98 | -6.5 | 22.5 | 19.9 |
| SG\&A | 52.58 | 55.09 | 4.8 | 11.7 | 11.5 |
| Selected SGEA items: |  |  |  |  |  |
| Salary and personnel expenses | 24.24 | 23.98 | -1.1 | 5.4 | 5.0 |
| Freight costs | 11.63 | 11.55 | -0.7 | 2.6 | 2.4 |
| Research and development | 4.18 | 4.67 | 11.7 | 0.9 | 1.0 |
| Promotion and advertising | 2.62 | 2.58 | -1.5 | 0.6 | 0.5 |
| Operating income | 49.03 | 39.89 | -18.6 | 10.8 | 8.4 |

Note: "YoY\%" means year-over-year percentage change.
Source: Based on information in Siam Cement Group's annual reports.
As shown in Exhibit 4, Siam Cement was affected in 2018 by higher input costs that could not be fully passed on to customers. Consequently, despite sales growth of $6.1 \%$, gross profit fell by $6.5 \%$ and gross margin declined. The company was able to limit its other operating costs; SG\&A expenses grew $4.8 \%$, declining slightly as a percentage of revenue. Operating income fell $18.6 \%$. This experience contrasts with the company's experience in 2016 (not shown), when lower input costs resulted in a widening of the gross margin by 240 basis points versus the prior year.

Although SG\&A expenses overall are generally less closely linked to revenue than is cost of sales, certain SG\&A expenses could be more variable than others. Specifically, selling and distribution expenses often have a large variable component and can be modeled as a percentage of sales, while general corporate costs are more fixed and might be better modeled using a fixed growth rate based on expected wage inflation.

Segment disclosures often include operating and EBITDA margin profitability by segment, but generally do not include cost items such as cost of sales, SG\&A, etc., by segment. If an analyst is constructing a model based on segment forecasts, the analyst might instead use summary measures on a segment basis, as shown in Example 1.

## EXAMPLE 1

## Analysis of a Consumer Goods Company with Multiple Segments

A consumer goods company reported an overall underlying operating margin of $19.1 \%$ in 2X19. As shown in Exhibit 5, the operating margin is lowest in its fastest-growing segment, Home Care. The other two segments enjoy higher margins but are growing more slowly.

## Exhibit 5: Segment Revenue and Profits (EUR millions, unless noted)

| Segment | 2X19 | 2X18 | '19/'18 YoY | Avg. Growth Rate, 2X17-2X19 |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| Beauty \& Personal Care | 21,868 | 20,624 | 6\% | 3\% |
| Foods \& Refreshments | 19,287 | 20,227 | -5\% | -5\% |
| Home Care | 10,825 | 10,131 | 7\% | 3\% |
| Total revenues | 51,980 | 50,982 | 2\% | 0\% |
| Underlying operating profit |  |  |  |  |
| Beauty \& Personal Care | 4,960 | 4,543 | 9\% |  |
| Foods \& Refreshments | 3,382 | 3,576 | -5\% |  |
| Home Care | 1,605 | 1,344 | 19\% |  |
| Total | 9,947 | 9,463 | 5\% |  |
| Underlying operating profit margin |  |  |  |  |
| Beauty \& Personal Care | 22.7\% | 22.0\% |  |  |
| Foods \& Refreshments | 17.5\% | 17.7\% |  |  |
| Home Care | 14.8\% | 13.3\% |  |  |
| Total | 19.1\% | 18.6\% |  |  |

Note: Underlying operating profit is a non-IFRS operating profit measure, equal to IFRS operating profit adjusted for items such as restructuring costs.

Source: Example adapted from Unilever.

1. Determine the estimated sales, operating profit, and operating profit margin by using the following two approaches: (A) Assume total sales growth of $2.0 \%$ and overall underlying operating margin of $19.1 \%$ for the next five years, and (B) assume each individual segment's sales growth and underlying operating margin continue at the same rate reported in 2019. Which approach will result in a higher estimated underlying operating profit after five years?

## Solution:

Exhibit 6 shows that operating profit after five years will be EUR10,962 million under Approach A and EUR11,549 million under Approach B.

Exhibit 6: Sales and Operating Profit, 2X19-2X24E (EUR millions, unless noted)

| Approach A | 2X19A | 2X20E | 2X21E | 2X22E | 2X23E | 2X24E |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| Total revenues | 51,980 | 53,020 | 54,080 | 55,162 | 56,265 | 57,390 |
| Growth rate |  | 2\% | 2\% | 2\% | 2\% | 2\% |
| Underlying operating profit | 9,947 | 10,127 | 10,329 | 10,536 | 10,747 | 10,962 |
| Growth rate |  | 2\% | 2\% | 2\% | 2\% | 2\% |
| Underlying operating profit margin | 19.1\% | 19.1\% | 19.1\% | 19.1\% | 19.1\% | 19.1\% |

Approach B

| Sales | 2X19A | 2X20E | 2X21E | 2X22E | 2X23E | 2X24E |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| Beauty \& Personal Care | 21,868 | 23,187 | 24,586 | 26,069 | 27,641 | 29,308 |
| Growth rate |  | 6\% | 6\% | 6\% | 6\% | 6\% |
| Foods \& Refreshments | 19,287 | 18,391 | 17,536 | 16,721 | 15,944 | 15,203 |
| Growth rate |  | -5\% | -5\% | -5\% | -5\% | -5\% |
| Home Care | 10,825 | 11,567 | 12,359 | 13,205 | 14,110 | 15,077 |
| Growth rate |  | 7\% | 7\% | 7\% | 7\% | 7\% |
| Total revenues | 51,980 | 53,144 | 54,481 | 55,995 | 57,695 | 59,588 |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| Margins | 2X19A | 2X20E | 2X21E | 2X22E | 2X23E | 2X24E |
| Beauty \& Personal Care | 22.7\% | 22.7\% | 22.7\% | 22.7\% | 22.7\% | 22.7\% |
| Foods \& Refreshments | 17.5\% | 17.5\% | 17.5\% | 17.5\% | 17.5\% | 17.5\% |
| Home Care | 14.8\% | 14.8\% | 14.8\% | 14.8\% | 14.8\% | 14.8\% |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| Underlying operating profit | 2X19A | 2X20E | 2X21E | 2X22E | 2X23E | 2X24E |
| Beauty \& Personal Care | 4,960 | 5,259 | 5,576 | 5,913 | 6,269 | 6,648 |
| Foods \& Refreshments | 3,382 | 3,225 | 3,075 | 2,932 | 2,796 | 2,666 |
| Home Care | 1,605 | 1,715 | 1,832 | 1,958 | 2,092 | 2,235 |
| Total | 9,947 | 10,199 | 10,484 | 10,803 | 11,157 | 11,549 |

2. Compare and explain the results under the two alternative approaches (A and B) in Question 1.

## Solution:

Approach A assumes a constant $2 \%$ total sales growth rate and a stable $19.1 \%$ underlying operating margin. Thus, the operating profit growth rate is in line with the revenue growth rate and constant at $2 \%$, which therefore assumes no difference in growth rates and profitability of the segments. Approach B assumes growth rates of $6 \%,-5 \%$, and $7 \%$ of sales for the Beauty \& Personal Care, Foods \& Refreshments, and Home Care segments. This approach results in a faster overall compounded growth rate than under Approach A ( $3 \%$ versus $2 \%$ ) and an annual increase, on average, in the total underlying operating profit margin of 6 bps due to the mix effect of different segment margins. In 2024E, Approach A yields an underlying operating profit margin of 19.1\%.
3. Assume the company can grow segment revenues over the next five years at the following rates: Beauty \& Personal Care, $3.0 \%$; Foods \& Refreshments, $2.0 \%$; Home Care, $4.0 \%$. But underlying operating profit margins in Beauty \& Personal Care will fall 20 bps annually for the next five years (because of high competition, limited growth, and costs resulting from the adoption of sustainable packaging), and operating profit margins in the Foods \& Refreshments and Home Care segments will increase by 15 and 50 bps, respectively, each year for the next five years (helped by increasing demand for the company's products and better utilization of its factories). Calculate the overall underlying operating profit margin in each of the next five years.

## Solution:

As shown in Exhibit 7, the overall underlying operating profit margin improves from $19.1 \%$ in 2X19 to 19.5\% in 2X24, because the margin decline in Beauty \& Personal Care is more than offset by the margin increase in Foods \& Refreshments and the faster-growing Home Care segment.

Exhibit 7: Sales and Operating Profit, 2X19-2X24E (EUR millions, unless noted)

| Sales | 2X19A | 2X20E | 2X21E | 2X22E | 2X23E | 2X24E |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| Beauty \& Personal Care | 21,868 | 22,524 | 23,200 | 23,896 | 24,613 | 25,351 |
| Growth rate |  | 3\% | 3\% | 3\% | 3\% | 3\% |
| Foods \& Refreshments | 19,287 | 19,673 | 20,066 | 20,468 | 20,877 | 21,294 |
| Growth rate |  | 2\% | 2\% | 2\% | 2\% | 2\% |
| Home Care | 10,825 | 11,258 | 11,708 | 12,177 | 12,664 | 13,170 |
| Growth rate |  | 4\% | 4\% | 4\% | 4\% | 4\% |
| Total revenues | 51,980 | 53,455 | 54,974 | 56,540 | 58,153 | 59,816 |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| Margins | 2X19A | 2X20E | 2X21E | 2X22E | 2X23E | 2X24E |
| Beauty \& Personal Care | 22.7\% | 22.5\% | 22.3\% | 22.1\% | 21.9\% | 21.7\% |
| Foods \& Refreshments | 17.5\% | 17.7\% | 17.8\% | 18.0\% | 18.1\% | 18.3\% |
| Home Care | 14.8\% | 15.3\% | 15.8\% | 16.3\% | 16.8\% | 17.3\% |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| Underlying operating profit | 2X19A | 2X20E | 2X21E | 2X22E | 2X23E | 2X24E |
| Beauty \& Personal Care | 4,960 | 5,064 | 5,169 | 5,277 | 5,386 | 5,496 |
| Foods \& Refreshments | 3,382 | 3,479 | 3,579 | 3,681 | 3,786 | 3,894 |
| Home Care | 1,605 | 1,725 | 1,853 | 1,988 | 2,131 | 2,282 |
| Total | 9,947 | 10,268 | 10,601 | 10,946 | 11,303 | 11,672 |
| Margin | 19.1\% | 19.2\% | 19.3\% | 19.4\% | 19.4\% | 19.5\% |

## Working Capital Forecasts

Working capital forecasts are typically made by using efficiency ratios, discussed in earlier modules, as the forecast object, which are combined with sales and costs forecasts to project accounts receivable, inventories, accounts payable, and other current assets and liabilities, as demonstrated in Example 2.

## EXAMPLE 2

## Working Capital Forecasts with Efficiency Ratios

Exhibit 8 shows revenue, COGS, and year-end working capital account balances for YY Ltd., a fictional company, for years 1-3. Based on the data in the exhibit, answer Questions 1-3.

Exhibit 8: YY Ltd. Financial Data (CNY millions)

| Year | 1 | 2 | 3 |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| Revenue | 174,915 | 205,839 | 245,866 |
| COGS | 152,723 | 177,285 | 209,114 |
| Accounts receivable | 5,598 | 6,949 | 10,161 |
| Inventory | 29,481 | 32,585 | 41,671 |
| Accounts payable | 46,287 | 59,528 | 72,199 |

1. Calculate days sales outstanding (DSO), inventory days on hand (DOH), and days payable outstanding (DPO) for years 1,2 , and 3 , using year-end balances and assuming a 365-day fiscal year.

## Solution:

Recall that days sales outstanding is equal to accounts receivable/(revenues/365), inventory days on hand is equal to inventories/(COGS/365), and days payable outstanding is equal to accounts payable/(COGS/365). Using the data in Exhibit 8, the three ratios for years 1-3 are as follows:

| Year | 1 | 2 | 3 |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| Days sales outstanding | 12 | 12 | 15 |
| Inventory days on hand | 70 | 67 | 73 |
| Days payable outstanding | 111 | 123 | 126 |

2. Your colleague Liang forecasts revenue growth of $18 \%, 16 \%$, and $13 \%$ and gross margins of $17 \%, 17 \%$, and $16 \%$ in years 4,5 , and 6 , respectively, for YY Ltd. Using Liang's forecasts, calculate expected revenue and COGS in years 4,5 , and 6.

## Solution:

Using Liang's forecasts for annual revenue growth and gross margins and the data in Exhibit 8, expected revenue and COGS for years 4-6 are as follows:

| Year (CNY millions) | 1 | 2 | 3 | 4 | 5 | 6 |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| Revenue | 174,915 | 205,839 | 245,866 | 290,122 | 336,541 | 380,292 |
| Growth rate |  | 18\% | 19\% | 18\% | 16\% | 13\% |
| COGS | 152,723 | 177,285 | 209,114 | 240,801 | 279,329 | 319,445 |
| Gross margin | 13\% | 14\% | 15\% | 17\% | 17\% | 16\% |

3. Liang forecasts that days sales outstanding, inventory days on hand, and days payable outstanding in years 4,5 , and 6 will remain the same as the year 3 amounts. Using Liang's forecasts as well as forecast revenue and COGS, calculate expected accounts receivable, inventories, and accounts payable year-end balances for years 4,5 , and 6 .
Solution:
Each of the efficiency ratios can be rearranged to yield working capital balances, because we have values for two of the three variables in them: the efficiency ratios are assumed to remain constant from year 3 levels, and revenue and COGS have already been forecast.
Days sales outstanding is equal to accounts receivable/(revenues/365); thus, accounts receivable is equal to days sales outstanding $\times$ (revenues/365). Similarly, inventories is equal to inventory days on hand $\times$ (COGS/365), and accounts payable is equal to days payable outstanding $\times($ COGS $/ 365)$. Using the data in Exhibit 8 and the revenue and COGS forecasts, year-end working capital account balances are as follows:

| Year (CNY millions) | 1 | 2 | 3 | 4 | 5 | 6 |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| Revenue | 174,915 | 205,839 | 245,866 | 290,122 | 336,541 | 380,292 |
| COGS | 152,723 | 177,285 | 209,114 | 240,801 | 279,329 | 319,445 |
| Accounts receivable | 5,598 | 6,949 | 10,161 | 11,990 | 13,908 | 15,716 |
| Inventories | 29,481 | 32,585 | 41,671 | 47,985 | 55,663 | 63,657 |
| Accounts payable | 46,287 | 59,528 | 72,199 | 83,139 | 96,442 | 110,292 |
| Days sales outstanding | 12 | 12 | 15 | 15 | 15 | 15 |
| Inventory days on hand | 70 | 67 | 73 | 73 | 73 | 73 |
| Days payable outstanding | 111 | 123 | 126 | 126 | 126 | 126 |

While a historical results approach is common for working capital efficiency ratios, analysts can also use the other forecast approaches. Exhibit 9 discusses forecast objects and approaches that Elaine Nguyen can use for Warehouse Club Inc.'s operating costs and working capital.

## Exhibit 9: Forecast Approaches for Warehouse Club Inc.'s Operating Costs and Working Capital

| Forecast Object | Forecast Approach | Example of Object and Approach for Warehouse Club Inc. |
| :--- | :--- | :--- |
| Gross margin (on net sales) | Historical results | From 2X10 to 2X19, Warehouse's gross margin increased by an average of 2 bps per year. Such an increase may reflect increasing bargaining power over suppliers with scale, and Nguyen can use the same 2 bps per year increase in gross margin as a forecast. |
|  | Historical base rates and convergence | Both the industry average gross margin and that of larger, more mature retailers such as Walmart are much greater than Warehouse's gross margin. But Warehouse's business model is to use a low gross margin on net sales to drive high-margin membership revenues. Therefore, Nguyen probably will not use this approach. |
|  | Management guidance | If Warehouse management provides guidance on margins, Nguyen can use this approach as the forecast, after evaluating management's forecasting credibility. |
|  | Analyst's discretionary forecast | Nguyen may formulate a discretionary forecast for gross margin by exploring the relationship between it, inflation/ deflation in Warehouse's product categories, and management's desire for member savings vs. competitors to equal $5 \times$ the annual price of membership. |
| Forecast Object | Forecast Approach | Example of Object and Approach for Warehouse Club Inc. |
| Selling, general, and administrative expenses (SG\&A) as a percentage of sales | Historical results | SG\&A, which captures the cost of operating stores and some merchandise distribution, is primarily composed of employee payroll. Relative to sales, it has remained mostly stable at or around $9 \%$. Nguyen may forecast it to remain the same. |
|  | Historical base rates and convergence | Warehouse's SG\&A as a percentage of sales is already lower than that of larger retailer competitors (and substantially lower than the retail industry average), owing to its business model differences that emphasize store productivity and cost leadership. Nguyen will therefore probably not use this approach to forecast SG\&A. |
|  | Management guidance | If Warehouse management provides guidance on SG\&A, Nguyen can use this approach as the forecast, after evaluating management's forecasting credibility. |
|  | Analyst's discretionary forecast | Since SG\&A is primarily composed of employee payroll, Nguyen may forecast it based on projected employee productivity (e.g., employees to stores) and projected wage rates, which may be based on macroeconomic variables like projected economy-wide wage growth. |


| Forecast Object | Forecast Approach | Example of Object and Approach for Warehouse Club Inc. |
| :--- | :--- | :--- |
| Working capital ratios (e.g., DSO, DOH, DPO) | Historical results | As of 2X19, Warehouse's DSO, DOH, and DPO were 3, 30, and 28, respectively. DSO and DPO have been stable for the last 10 years, while DOH has decreased by 7 days since 2X10. Nguyen might forecast a stable DSO and DPO and a modestly declining DOH over the next several years. |
|  | Historical base rates and convergence | Warehouse's working capital ratios and cash conversion cycle are materially better than the industry average and some larger peers and have been for many years, owing to its business model differences. Nguyen will therefore probably not use this forecast approach, unless Warehouse changes its business model (e.g., it launches an e-commerce business). |
|  | Management guidance | If Warehouse management provides guidance on working capital (e.g., a projection for the net working capital to sales ratio), Nguyen can use this approach as the forecast, after evaluating management's forecasting credibility. |
|  | Analyst's discretionary forecast | Nguyen may develop a discretionary forecast for working capital by, for example, estimating net working capital to sales ratios by product category (e.g., fresh foods, packaged foods, non-food merchandise) and applying them to a net sales forecast also broken down by category. |

## QUESTION SET

Iliso Marketplace Ltd., the e-commerce retailer introduced in prior modules, reports its GMV by product category: in 2X19, the mix was $55 \%$ food and grocery, 20\% media and electronics, 8\% home goods and décor, and $17 \%$ apparel and beauty products. However, Iliso presents only aggregated financial results (no segment disclosures).

Iliso's cost of revenue is primarily composed of the inventory costs of products sold to customers where Iliso records revenue gross. Inventory costs include shipping and handling costs. Additionally, cost of revenue includes outbound shipping and logistics-related expenses, as well as delivery service costs from the third-party merchant business, where Iliso is the delivery service provider. Cost of revenue also includes depreciation expense related to inventory handling and shipping assets.

Iliso's operating, general, and administrative expenses include costs incurred in operating and staffing its fulfillment centers, customer service costs, payment processing fees, costs related to the design, execution, and maintenance of Iliso's technology infrastructure, and general corporate function costs.

Iliso has minimal accounts receivable, because customers pay with credit cards that settle in less than a week. Iliso does have significant inventory, accounts payable, and accrued expenses on its balance sheet.

1. How might an analyst use Iliso's disclosure of GMV by product category?

## Solution:

An analyst could estimate cost of sales/sales and gross profit margin by category by looking at other retailers that primarily sell products in the specific category. Information on those companies could be used to check whether Iliso's gross profit margin is consistent with that implied by the product category mix. Also, if the mix is expected to change, an analyst can adjust the aggregate cost of sales/sales and gross profit margins accordingly. The infor-

| mation should probably not be used directly to develop detailed forecasts by category, because those forecasts would not be verifiable and would not be an efficient use of the analyst's time. |
| :--- |
| 2. It is most appropriate to forecast Iliso's cost of revenue as a percentage of its: <br> A. retail sales. <br> B. total revenues. <br> C. total GMV sales. <br> Solution: <br> A is correct. Cost of revenue should be based on Iliso's retail sales. Cost of revenue is unaffected by third-party merchandise sales unless the merchant uses Iliso's fulfillment network for warehousing and delivery. The company does not provide information on such use by third parties, and it would be a small cost compared with cost of revenue for Iliso's retail sales. Iliso's cost of revenue is primarily composed of the inventory costs of products sold to customers where Iliso records revenue gross. |
| 3. Discuss the use of a historical base rates and convergence approach, calculated using other retailers' financial results, for forecasting Iliso's operating expenses. <br> Solution: <br> Iliso's e-commerce business model and the breadth of the retail sales industry may make industry averages inappropriate to use for Iliso. However, if there are larger, more mature e-commerce retailers to calculate statistics for, this approach may be appropriate. |
| 4. If food and grocery increases as a proportion of Iliso's retail sales, which of the following would most likely increase? <br> A. Inventory turnover <br> B. Gross profit margin <br> C. Current assets/sales <br> Solution: <br> A is correct. Inventory turnover would increase because of the perishable nature of food and grocery. Inventory as a percentage of sales would decrease, resulting in a decrease in current assets to sales. | STRUCTURE

explain approaches to forecasting a company's capital investments and capital structure

Projections for long-term assets are based on cash flow statement and income statement projections, because net PP\&E and intangible assets on the balance sheet primarily increase due to capital expenditures and decrease due to depreciation and

