B. Issue a buy recommendation for each share issue.
C. Reexamine the models and inputs used for the valuations.

## Solution to 2:

C is correct. It seems improbable that all the share issues analyzed are overvalued, as indicated by market prices in excess of estimated value-particularly because the market segment is widely followed by analysts. Thus, the analyst will not issue a sell recommendation for each issue. The analyst will most appropriately reexamine the models and inputs prior to issuing any recommendations. A buy recommendation is not an appropriate response to an overvalued security.
3. An analyst, using a number of models and a range of inputs, estimates a security’s value to be between $¥ 250$ and $¥ 270$. The security is trading at $¥ 265$. The security appears to be:
A. overvalued.
B. undervalued.
C. fairly valued.

## Solution to 3:

C is correct. The security’s market price of $¥ 265$ is within the range estimated by the analyst. The security appears to be fairly valued.

Analysts often use a variety of models and inputs to achieve greater confidence in their estimates of intrinsic value. The use of more than one model and a range of inputs also helps the analyst understand the sensitivity of value estimates to different models and inputs.

## CATEGORIES OF EQUITY VALUATION MODELS

describe major categories of equity valuation models

Three major categories of equity valuation models are as follows:

- Present value models (synonym: discounted cash flow models). These models estimate the intrinsic value of a security as the present value of the future benefits expected to be received from the security. In present value models, benefits are often defined in terms of cash expected to be distributed to shareholders (dividend discount models) or in terms of cash flows available to be distributed to shareholders after meeting capital expenditure and working capital needs (free-cash-flow-to-equity models). Many models fall within this category, ranging from the relatively simple to the very complex. In Section 4, we discuss in detail two of the simpler models, the Gordon (constant) growth model and the two-stage dividend discount models.
- Multiplier models (synonym: market multiple models). These models are based chiefly on share price multiples or enterprise value multiples. The former model estimates intrinsic value of a common share from a price multiple for some fundamental variable, such as revenues, earnings, cash flows,
or book value. Examples of the multiples include price to earnings (P/E, share price divided by earnings per share) and price to sales ( $\mathrm{P} / \mathrm{S}$, share price divided by sales per share). The fundamental variable may be stated on a forward basis (e.g., forecasted EPS for the next year) or a trailing basis (e.g., EPS for the past year), as long as the usage is consistent across companies being examined. Price multiples are also used to compare relative values. The use of the ratio of share price to EPS - that is, the P/E multiple-to judge relative value is an example of this approach to equity valuation.
Enterprise value (EV) multiples have the form (Enterprise value)/(Value of a fundamental variable). Two possible choices for the denominator are earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation, and amortization (EBITDA) and total revenue. Enterprise value, the numerator, is a measure of a company's total market value from which cash and short-term investments have been subtracted (because an acquirer could use those assets to pay for acquiring the company). An estimate of common share value can be calculated indirectly from the EV multiple; the value of liabilities and preferred shares can be subtracted from the EV to arrive at the value of common equity.
- Asset-based valuation models. These models estimate intrinsic value of a common share from the estimated value of the assets of a corporation minus the estimated value of its liabilities and preferred shares. The estimated market value of the assets is often determined by making adjustments to the book value (synonym: carrying value) of assets and liabilities. The theory underlying the asset-based approach is that the value of a business is equal to the sum of the value of the business's assets.

As already mentioned, many analysts use more than one type of model to estimate value. Analysts recognize that each model is a simplification of the real world and that there are uncertainties related to model appropriateness and the inputs to the models. The choice of model(s) will depend on the availability of information to input into the model(s) and the analyst's confidence in the information and in the appropriateness of the model(s).

## EXAMPLE 2

## Categories of Equity Valuation Models

1. An analyst is estimating the intrinsic value of a new company. The analyst has one year of financial statements for the company and has calculated the average values of a variety of price multiples for the industry in which the company operates. The analyst plans to use at least one model from each of the three categories of valuation models. The analyst is least likely to rely on the estimate(s) from the:
A. multiplier model(s).
B. present value model(s).
C. asset-based valuation model(s).

## Solution to 1:

B is correct. Because the company has only one year of data available, the analyst is least likely to be confident in the inputs for a present value model. The values on the balance sheet, even before adjustment, are likely to be close to market values because the assets are all relatively new. The multiplier models are based on average multiples from the industry.
2. Based on a company's EPS of $€ 1.35$, an analyst estimates the intrinsic value of a security to be $€ 16.60$. Which type of model is the analyst most likely to be using to estimate intrinsic value?
A. Multiplier model.
B. Present value model.
C. Asset-based valuation model.

## Solution to 2:

A is correct. The analyst is using a multiplier model based on the P/E multiple. The P/E multiple used was $16.60 / 1.35=12.3$.

As you begin the study of specific equity valuation models in the next section, you must bear in mind that any model of value is, by necessity, a simplification of the real world. Never forget this simple fact! You may encounter models much more complicated than the ones discussed here, but even those models will be simplifications of reality.

## BACKGROUND FOR THE DIVIDEND DISCOUNT MODEL

describe regular cash dividends, extra dividends, stock dividends, stock splits, reverse stock splits, and share repurchases
describe dividend payment chronology

Present value models follow a fundamental tenet of economics which states that individuals defer consumption-that is, they invest-for the future benefits expected. Individuals and companies make an investment because they expect thereby to earn a rate of return over the investment period. Logically, the value of an investment should be equal to the present value of the expected future benefits. For common shares, an analyst can equate benefits to the cash flows to be generated by the investment. The simplest present value model of equity valuation is the dividend discount model (DDM), which specifies cash flows from a common stock investment to be dividends.

The next section describes aspects of dividends that users of dividend discount models should understand.

## Dividends: Background for the Dividend Discount Model

Generally, there are two sources of return from investing in equities: (1) cash dividends received by an investor over his or her holding period and (2) the change in the market price of equities over that holding period.

A dividend is a distribution paid to shareholders based on the number of shares owned, and a cash dividend is a cash distribution made to a company's shareholders. Cash dividends are typically paid out regularly at known intervals; such dividends are known as regular cash dividends. By contrast, an extra dividend or special dividend is a dividend paid by a company that does not pay dividends on a regular schedule or a

