B. free cash flow to equity model.
C. cash flow return on investment model.

## Solution to 3:

A is correct. Dividend discount models focus on expected dividends.
How is the required rate of return for use in present value models estimated? To estimate the required rate of return on a share, analysts frequently use the capital asset pricing model (CAPM):

Required rate of return on share $i=$ Current expected risk

- free rate of return
+ Beta $_{i}$ [Market (equity) risk premium]
Equation 5 states that the required rate of return on a share is the sum of the current expected risk-free rate plus a risk premium that equals the product of the stock's beta (a measure of non-diversifiable risk) and the market risk premium (the expected return of the market in excess of the risk-free return, where in practice, the "market" is often represented by a broad stock market index). However, even if analysts agree that the CAPM is an appropriate model, their inputs into the CAPM may differ. Thus, there is no uniquely correct answer to the question: What is the required rate of return?

Other common methods for estimating the required rate of return for the stock of a company include adding a risk premium that is based on economic judgments, rather than the CAPM, to an appropriate risk-free rate (usually a government bond) and adding a risk premium to the yield on the company's bonds. Good business and economic judgment is paramount in estimating the required rate of return. In many investment firms, required rates of return are determined by firm policy.

## PREFERRED STOCK VALUATION

calculate the intrinsic value of a non-callable, non-convertible preferred stock
explain advantages and disadvantages of each category of valuation model

General dividend discount models are relatively easy to apply to preferred shares. In its simplest form, preferred stock is a form of equity (generally, non-voting) that has priority over common stock in the receipt of dividends and on the issuer's assets in the event of a company's liquidation. It may have a stated maturity date at which time payment of the stock's par (face) value is made or it may be perpetual with no maturity date; additionally, it may be callable or convertible.

For a non-callable, non-convertible perpetual preferred share paying a level dividend $D$ and assuming a constant required rate of return over time, Equation 1 reduces to the formula for the present value of a perpetuity. Its value is:

$$
V_{0}=\frac{D_{0}}{r}
$$

For example, a \$100 par value non-callable perpetual preferred stock offers an annual dividend of $\$ 5.50$. If its required rate of return is 6 percent, the value estimate would be $\$ 5.50 / 0.06=\$ 91.67$.

For a non-callable, non-convertible preferred stock with maturity at time $n$, the estimated intrinsic value can be estimated by using Equation 3 but using the preferred stock's par value, $F$, instead of $P_{n}$ :

$$
V_{0}=\sum_{t=1}^{n} \frac{D_{t}}{(1+r)^{t}}+\frac{F}{(1+r)^{n}}
$$

When Equation 7 is used, the most precise approach is to use values for $n, r$, and $D$ that reflect the payment schedule of the dividends. This method is similar to the practice of fixed-income analysts in valuing a bond. For example, a non-convertible preferred stock with a par value of $£ 20.00$, maturity in six years, a nominal required rate of return of 8.20 percent, and semiannual dividends of $£ 2.00$ would be valued by using an $n$ of 12 , an $r$ of 4.10 percent, a $D$ of $£ 2.00$, and an $F$ of $£ 20.00$. The result would be an estimated value of $£ 31.01$. Assuming payments are annual rather than semiannual (i.e., assuming that $n=6, r=8.20$ percent, and $D=£ 4.00$ ) would result in an estimated value of $£ 30.84$.

Preferred stock issues are frequently callable (redeemable) by the issuer at some point prior to maturity, often at par value or at prices in excess of par value that decline to par value as the maturity date approaches. Such call options tend to reduce the value of a preferred issue to an investor because the option to redeem will be exercised by the issuer when it is in the issuer's favor and ignored when it is not. For example, if an issuer can redeem shares at par value that would otherwise trade (on the basis of dividends, maturity, and required rate of return) above par value, the issuer has motivation to redeem the shares.

Preferred stock issues can also include a retraction option that enables the holder of the preferred stock to sell the shares back to the issuer prior to maturity on prespecified terms. Essentially, the holder of the shares has a put option. Such put options tend to increase the value of a preferred issue to an investor because the option to retract will be exercised by the investor when it is in the investor's favor and ignored when it is not. Although the precise valuation of issues with such embedded options is beyond the scope of this reading, Example 6 includes a case in which Equation 7 can be used to approximate the value of a callable, retractable preferred share.

## EXAMPLE 6

## Preferred Share Valuation: Two Cases

## Case 1: Non-callable, Non-convertible, Perpetual Preferred Shares

The following facts concerning the Union Electric Company 4.75 percent perpetual preferred shares are as follows:

- Issuer: Union Electric Co. (owned by Ameren)
- Par value: US\$100
- Dividend: US\$4.75 per year
- Maturity: perpetual
- Embedded options: none
- Credit rating: Moody's Investors Service/Standard \& Poor's Ba1/BB
- Required rate of return on $\mathrm{Ba} 1 / \mathrm{BB}$ rated preferred shares as of valuation date: 7.5 percent.

1. Estimate the intrinsic value of this preferred share.

## Solution

Basing the discount rate on the required rate of return on $\mathrm{Ba} 1 / \mathrm{BB}$ rated preferred shares of 7.5 percent gives an intrinsic value estimate of US\$4.75/0.075 = US\$63.33.
2. Explain whether the intrinsic value of this issue would be higher or lower if the issue were callable (with all other facts remaining unchanged).

## Solution

The intrinsic value would be lower if the issue were callable. The option to redeem or call the issue is valuable to the issuer because the call will be exercised when doing so is in the issuer's interest. The intrinsic value of the shares to the investor will typically be lower if the issue is callable. In this case, because the intrinsic value without the call is much less than the par value, the issuer would be unlikely to redeem the issue if it were callable; thus, callability would reduce intrinsic value, but only slightly.

## Case 2: Retractable Term Preferred Shares

Retractable term preferred shares are a type of preferred share that has been previously issued by Canadian companies, and have now began to be offered by companies in other jurisdictions, including Japan. This type of issue specifies a "retraction date" when the preferred shareholders have the option to sell back their shares to the issuer at par value (i.e., the shares are "retractable" or "putable" at that date). ${ }^{2}$ At predetermined dates prior to the retraction date, the issuer has the option to redeem the preferred issue at predetermined prices (which are always at or above par value).

An example of a retractable term preferred share currently outstanding is TMC (Toyota Motor Corporation), First Series Model AA class shares, with a 0.5 percent dividend rate, increasing by 0.5 percent every year until 2020 and thereafter, becoming fixed at 2.5 percent. TMC is leading global automobile manufacturer, with headquarters in Japan and global operations. The issue is in Japanese Yen. The shares have a $¥ 10,598$ par value and pay a semiannual dividend of $¥ 26.5$ [ $=(0.5$ percent $\times ¥ 10,598) / 2$ ] on 31 March 2016. The semiannual dividend is expected to increase to $¥ 132.5$ [ $=(2.5$ percent $\times ¥ 10,598) / 2$ ] on 31 March 2020 and beyond. As of 31 December 2017 the company carried ratings from Moody's and Standard \& Poor's of Aa3 and AA-, respectively. Thus, the shares are viewed by Moody's and Standard \& Poor's as having "adequate" credit quality, qualified by "Aa3 and AA-," which means relatively high quality within that group. Beginning from 2 April 2021, the shares are redeemable at the option of TMC at $¥ 10,598$ (par value). The retraction date is the last day of March, June, September, and December of each year, starting from 1 September 2020, with the shares retractable at par value. The Series AA shares have voting rights and may exercise their voting rights and other rights held by holders of common shares of TMC in the same manner. The Series AA shares were issued at a $20 \%$ premium to the common shares price in 2015, and since then the share price has decreased to $¥ 7,243$ as at 31 December 2017, and with a current required rate of 3.05 per year ( 1.525 percent semiannual). Because the issue's market price is so far below the prices at which TMC could redeem or call the issue, redemption is considered to be unlikely by TMC, whereas the retraction option for the Series

[^0]AA holders appears to have a significant value since they will potentially be able to put back the shares to TMC at approximately 45 percent over the current market value ( $¥ 10,598$ compared to $¥ 7,243$ ).
3. Assume that the issue will be retracted in December 2020; the holders of the shares will put the shares to the company in December 2020. Based on the information given, estimate the intrinsic value of a share. Assume it is December 2017.

## Solution

An intrinsic value estimate of a share of this preferred issue is $¥ 10,279$.
Expected semiannual dividends:
Year ended March 31, 2018: $¥ 79.5[=(1.5$ percent $\times ¥ 10,598) / 2]$
Year ended March 31, 2019: $¥ 106[=(2.0$ percent $\times ¥ 10,598) / 2]$
Year ended March 31, 2020: $¥ 132.5[=(2.5$ percent $\times ¥ 10,598) / 2]$
$V_{0}=\left[\frac{¥ 79.5}{1.01525}+\frac{¥ 79.5}{1.01525^{2}}+\frac{¥ 106}{1.01525^{3}}+\frac{¥ 106}{1.01525^{4}}+\frac{¥ 132.5}{1.01525^{5}}+\frac{¥ 132.5}{1.01525^{6}}+\frac{¥ 10,598}{1.01525^{6}}\right]$
$\approx ¥ 10,279$
The difference between the current market price of $¥ 7,243$ and the intrinsic value of $¥ 10,279$ is the implied value of retractable option given to the holders of the Series AA shares.

## THE GORDON GROWTH MODEL

A rather obvious problem when one is trying to implement Equation 1 for common equity is that it requires the analyst to estimate an infinite series of expected dividends. To simplify this process, analysts frequently make assumptions about how dividends will grow or change over time. The Gordon (constant) growth model (Gordon, 1962) is a simple and well-recognized DDM. The model assumes dividends grow indefinitely at a constant rate.

Because of its assumption of a constant growth rate, the Gordon growth model is particularly appropriate for valuing the equity of dividend-paying companies that are relatively insensitive to the business cycle and in a mature growth phase. Examples might include an electric utility serving a slowly growing area or a producer of a staple food product (e.g., bread). A history of increasing the dividend at a stable growth rate is another practical criterion if the analyst believes that pattern will hold in the future.

With a constant growth assumption, Equation 1 can be written as Equation 8, where $g$ is the constant growth rate:


[^0]:    2 "Retraction" refers to this option, which is a put option. The terminology is not completely settled: The type of share being called "retractable term preferred" is also known as "hard retractable preferred," with "hard" referring to payment in cash rather than common shares at the retraction date.

