> 2. Level 2 assets: (a) Inputs other than quoted market prices are directly or indirectly observable for valuation on measurement date
> 3. Level 3 assets: (b) Unobservable inputs are used to evaluate fair value for the assets

# ALTERNATIVE INVESTMENT RETURNS 

calculate and interpret alternative investment returns both before and after fees

Hedge funds often use complex strategies to achieve outsized returns with low correlation with the broader market. These more complex strategies require more sophisticated portfolio management tools and a larger range of skills, making them more expensive to run. Rather than paying a very high flat management fee, investors demand that some of the compensation is aligned to the performance delivered by the strategy in the form of a performance fee.

Apart from the performance fee, there are also other customized, complex compensation arrangements that seek to align manager and investor incentives. These structures are designed to reward investors for early involvement, larger investments, and/or longer lockup periods. Managers benefit from applying specialized knowledge and skills to achieve steadily rising returns in excess of a designated hurdle rate. These complex fee structures impact returns for different investors in the same fund, as well as returns before and after fees across various alternative investments.

Another factor that can lock in or magnify losses for hedge funds is investor redemptions. Redemptions frequently occur when a hedge fund is performing poorly. Redemptions may require the hedge fund manager to liquidate some positions and potentially receive particularly disadvantageous prices when forced to do so by redemption pressures, while also incurring transaction costs.

Funds sometimes charge a redemption fee to discourage redemption and to offset the transaction costs for remaining investors in the fund. A notice period is a period (typically $30-90$ days) in advance that investors may be required to notify a fund of their intent to redeem some or all their investment. This notice period allows the fund manager an opportunity to liquidate a position in an orderly fashion without magnifying the losses. A lockup period is the minimum holding period before investors are allowed to make withdrawals or redeem shares from a fund. This provision is intended to allow the hedge fund manager the required time to implement and potentially realize a strategy's expected results. If the fund receives a drawdown request shortly after a new investment, the lockup period forces the investors who made the request to stay in the fund for a period of time rather than be allowed to immediately withdraw. In addition, funds sometimes impose a gate, a provision that when implemented limits or restricts redemptions for a period of time, usually at the discretion of the fund manager. Investors should be aware of their liquidity needs before investing in a fund with restrictive provisions.

A hedge fund's ability to demand a long lockup period while raising a significant amount of investment capital depends a great deal on the reputation of either the firm or the hedge fund manager. Funds of hedge funds may offer more redemption flexibility than is afforded to direct investors in hedge funds because of special redemption arrangements with the underlying hedge fund managers, the maintenance of added cash reserves, access to temporary bridge-loan financing, or the simple avoidance of less liquid hedge fund strategies.

Ideally, redemption terms should be designed to match the expected liquidity of the assets being invested in, but even with careful planning, an initial drawdown can turn into something far more serious when it involves illiquid and obscure assets. These left-tailed loss events are not easily modeled for hedge funds.

## Alternative Investment Returns

## Custom Fee Arrangements

Alternative investments often involve customized fee arrangements combining management and performance-based fees that vary based on the size, timing, and/or terms of investor participation in the investment over time. Examples include the following:

- Fees based on liquidity terms and asset size: Limited partnerships may charge different rates depending on the liquidity terms that an investor is willing to accept (longer lockups resulting in lower fees), and managers may discount their fees for larger investors or for placement agents who introduced these investors. Different investors in the same fund may face different fee structures. For example, management fees for large LPs might range from $0.5 \%$ to $1.5 \%$, with incentive fees reduced to $10 \%-15 \%$, depending on the mandate. Such reductions can be meaningful in terms of net realized returns. However, smaller funds with strong performance (and capacity constraints) are able to maintain higher fees and may even decline business from larger investors rather than agree to a lower fee.
- Founders shares: As a way to entice early participation in startup funds, managers sometimes offer incentives known as founders class shares. Founders shares entitle investors to a lower fee structure, such as a $1.5 \%$ management fee and a 10\% performance fee rather than a more standard 2\% management fee and a $20 \%$ performance fee, and may apply only to the first $\$ 100$ million in assets invested, although cutoff thresholds vary. Another alternative is to reduce the fees for early founders share investors once the fund achieves a critical mass or performance targets.
- "Either/or" fees: Major institutional investors, such as the Teacher Retirement System of Texas, have demanded that alternative investment funds accept an either/or fee agreement by choosing between fixed management and variable performance fees. Managers agree either to charge a lower, 1\% management fee (to cover expenses during down years) or to accept a higher, $30 \%$ incentive fee above a mutually agreed-upon annual hurdle (to incentivize and reward managers during up years), whichever is greater. Major investors offering larger commitments may negotiate such novel fee structures designed to reward returns in excess of a benchmark, while smaller investors, such as high-net-worth individuals with smaller commitments, usually face more traditional fees.


## Alternative Investment Return Calculations

Return calculations vary among alternative investments based on the form of the investments, as described in an earlier lesson. While more liquid alternative investments, such as REITs, commodity index exchange-traded funds, or other frequently traded investments, have a simple management fee structure similar to common assets, those with longer life cycles, illiquidity, and less transparency, such as private equity, hedge funds, and real estate, often use performance fees with modifications to create incentives for managers to act in the best interest of investors.

The impact of different fee arrangements and their effect on the resulting returns to investors is best illustrated using a series of examples. If we assume fixed GP management fees as a percentage of assets under management (AUM) of $r_{m}$, beginning-of-period assets of $P_{0}$, end-of-period assets of $P_{1}$, and a GP performance fee ( $p$ ) that is a percentage of total return, the GP's return in currency terms ( $R_{G P}$ ) is as follows:

$$
R_{G P}=\left(P_{1} \times r_{m}\right)+\max \left[0,\left(P_{1}-P_{0}\right) \times p\right] .
$$

And we may solve for an investor's periodic rate of return, $r_{i}$, as follows:

$$
r_{i}=\left(P_{1}-P_{0}-R_{G P}\right) / P_{0} .
$$

## EXAMPLE 3

## Kettleside Timberland LP

Kettleside is a timberland investment management organization with $\$ 100$ million of initial investment capital. It charges a 1\% management fee based on year-end AUM ( $r_{m}$ ) and a $20 \%$ performance fee ( $p$ ). In its first year, Kettleside generates a $30 \%$ return. Assume management fees are calculated using an end-of-period valuation.

1. What are Kettleside's fees if the performance and management fees are calculated independently? What is an investor's effective return given this fee structure?

## Solution:

Using Equation 4 with $P_{0}$ equal to $\$ 100$ million, $P_{1}$ of $\$ 130$ million, $r_{m}=1 \%$, and $p=20 \%$,

$$
\begin{aligned}
& R_{G P}=\$ 130 \text { million } \times 1 \%+\max [0,(\$ 130 \text { million }-\$ 100 \text { million }) \times 20 \%] \\
& =\$ 7.3 \text { million } \\
& r_{i}=(\$ 130 \text { million }-\$ 100 \text { million }-\$ 7.3 \text { million }) / \$ 100 \text { million } \\
& =22.7 \%
\end{aligned}
$$

2. What are Kettleside's fees if the performance fee is calculated from the return net of the management fee? What is an investor's net return given this fee structure?

## Solution:

In order to solve for GP return where performance fee is calculated net of management fees, we must modify Equation 4 as follows:

$$
R_{G P(\text { Net })}=\left(P_{1} \times r_{m}\right)+\max \left\{0,\left[P_{1}\left(1-r_{m}\right)-P_{0}\right] \times p\right\}
$$

Using Equation 6 with $P_{0}$ of $\$ 100$ million, $P_{1}$ of $\$ 130$ million, $r_{m}=1 \%$, and $p$ = 20\%,

$$
\begin{aligned}
& R_{G P(N e t)}=\$ 130 \text { million } \times 1 \%+\max \{0,[\$ 130 \text { million }(0.99)-\$ 100 \text { million }] \times \\
& 20 \%\} \\
& =\$ 7.04 \text { million. }
\end{aligned}
$$

$$
r_{i}=(\$ 130 \text { million }-\$ 100 \text { million }-\$ 7.04 \text { million }) / \$ 100 \text { million }
$$

$$
=22.96 \% .
$$

The previous example demonstrates how fee calculations affect investor returns, with a higher return when fees are calculated on a net basis. Alternative investment databases and indexes usually report fund performance net of aggregated fees. If fee structures vary, the actual net-of-fee returns earned by various investors may vary from the quoted return.

One fee structure variation involves the modification of performance fees using hurdle rates and high-water marks. In the next example, we consider the effect of both on investor returns using the same details from the prior example.

## EXAMPLE 4

## Kettleside Timberland LP Performance Fee Modifications

As in the prior case, Kettleside Timberland LP has initial capital of $\$ 100$ million, charging a $1 \%$ management fee based on year-end AUM $\left(r_{m}\right)$ and a $20 \%$ performance fee (p).

1. If Kettleside's fee agreement specifies a $6 \%$ hurdle rate with performance fees based on returns in excess of the hurdle rate, what are Kettleside's fees assuming the performance fee is calculated net of the management fee? What is an investor's net return given this fee structure?

## Solution:

To solve for Kettleside's fees with a hard hurdle rate calculated net of management fees, we make a further adjustment to Equation 4 by incorporating the hurdle rate, $r_{h}$, as follows:

$$
R_{G P(\text { Net with Hurdle })}=\left(P_{1} \times r_{m}\right)+\max \left\{0,\left[P_{1}\left(1-r_{m}\right)-P_{0} \times(1.06)\right] \times p\right\}
$$

$R_{G P(\text { Net with Hurdle })}$
$=\$ 130$ million $\times 1 \%+\max \{0,[\$ 130$ million(0.99) $-\$ 100$ million(1.06)] $\times$ 20\%\}
$=\$ 5.84$ million.
$r_{i}=(\$ 130$ million $-\$ 100$ million $-\$ 5.84$ million $) / \$ 100$ million
$=24.16 \%$.
2. In the second year, Kettleside fund value declines to $\$ 110$ million. The fee structure is as specified in Question 1 but also includes the use of a high-water mark ( $P_{H W M}$ ) computed net of fees. What are Kettleside's fees in the
second year? What is an investor's net return for the second year given this fee structure?

## Solution:

We must again alter Equation 4 to include the high-water mark ( $P_{H W M}$ ) provision, as follows:

$$
R_{G P(\text { High-Water Mark })}=\left(P_{2} \times r_{m}\right)+\max \left[0,\left(P_{2}-P_{H W M}\right) \times p\right],
$$

where $P_{H W M}$ is defined as the maximum fund value at the end of any previous period net of fees. We may solve for investor return $r_{i}$ in Period 2 as follows:

$$
r_{i}=\left(P_{2}-P_{1}-R_{G P}\right) / P_{1} .
$$

$$
\begin{aligned}
& R_{G P(\text { High-Water Mark })} \\
& =\$ 110 \text { million } \times 1 \%+\max [0,(\$ 110 \text { million }-\$ 122.7 \text { million }) \times 20 \%] \\
& =\$ 1.1 \text { million. } \\
& r_{i}=(\$ 110 \text { million }-\$ 122.7 \text { million }-\$ 1.1 \text { million }) / \$ 122.7 \text { million } \\
& =-11.247 \%
\end{aligned}
$$

The beginning capital position in the second year for the investors is $\$ 130$ million - $\$ 7.3$ million $=\$ 122.7$ million. The ending capital position at the end of the second year is $\$ 110$ million $-\$ 1.1$ million $=\$ 108.9$ million.
3. In the third year, Kettleside's fund value increases to $\$ 128$ million. The fee structure is as specified in Questions 1 and 2 of Example 4. What are Kettleside's fees in the third year? What is an investor's net return for the third year given this fee structure?

## Solution:

We amend Equations 8 and 9 to reflect returns for the third period and calculate as follows:

$$
\begin{aligned}
& R_{G P(\text { High-Water Mark })}=\left(P_{3} \times r_{m}\right)+\max \left[0,\left(P_{3}-P_{H W M}\right) \times p\right] \\
& r_{i}=\left(P_{3}-P_{2}-R_{G P}\right) / P_{2}
\end{aligned}
$$

Note that the high-water mark, $P_{H W M}$, is the highest value of the fund after fees in all previous years. In Kettleside's case, it was $\$ 122.7$ million, the ending value in the first year, $P_{1}$.

## Kettleside Timberland LP Performance Fee Modifications

| Year | Fund Value $(\$ \mathrm{~m})$, after Fees |
| :---: | :---: |
| 0 | 100.00 |
| 1 | 122.70 |
| 2 | 108.90 |

[^0]$$
=15.39 \% .
$$

The beginning capital position in the third year for the investors is $\$ 110$ million $-\$ 1.1$ million $=\$ 108.9$ million. The ending capital position for the third year is $\$ 128$ million $-\$ 2.34$ million $=\$ 125.66$ million, which represents a new high-water mark to be applied the following year for this investor.

Performance fee modifications may have similar or different effects on the periodic investor returns depending on the timing of an investment. For example, if two Kettleside investors were to purchase the fund at different times and had otherwise similar fee structures, they would both realize a fee reduction in the case of a hard hurdle equal to $P_{t} \times r_{h} \times p$, or the product of the end-of-period fund value for year $t$, the hurdle rate, and the performance fee. However, in the case of a high-water mark, the time-dependent nature of this fee modification gives different results for an investor who enters the fund at a later date, as in the following example.

## EXAMPLE 5

## Kettleside Timberland LP High-Water Mark for New Investor

At the end of Year 2, Kettleside Timberland LP has capital of $\$ 108.9$ million. Consider the Year 3 returns of a new investor assuming the same fund performance and fee structure-namely, a 1\% management fee based on year-end AUM $\left(r_{m}\right)$, a $20 \%$ performance fee $(p)$, and a high-water mark provision.

$$
\begin{aligned}
& R_{G P(\text { High-Water Mark })}=\left(P_{3} \times r_{m}\right)+\max \left[0,\left(P_{3}-P_{H W M}\right) \times p\right] \\
& r_{i}=\left(P_{3}-P_{2}-R_{G P}\right) / P_{2} \\
& R_{G P(\text { High-Water Mark })} \\
& =\$ 128 \text { million } \times 1 \%+\max [0,(\$ 128 \text { million }-\$ 108.9 \text { million }) \times 20 \%] \\
& =\$ 5.1 \text { million. } \\
& r_{i}=(\$ 128 \text { million }-\$ 108.9 \text { million }-\$ 5.1 \text { million }) / \$ 108.9 \text { million } \\
& =12.856 \%
\end{aligned}
$$

Note that the new investor in Example 5 realizes no high-water mark reduction in fees as in the prior case and therefore faces a lower periodic return than the investor participating since the fund's inception.

In other instances, the timing of returns can have a meaningful impact on manager fees and investor returns, as shown in the following example of a clawback provision.

## EXAMPLE 6

## Tenderledge Opportunity Fund LP-Clawback Provision

Tenderledge Opportunity Fund makes $\$ 20$ million in new investments, evenly divided with $\$ 10$ million into Arguston Inc. (a leveraged buyout) and $\$ 10$ million to Heartfield Digital (an early-stage venture) One year later, Arguston is sold to a strategic buyer for $\$ 22$ million after costs. Two years later, Heartfield Digital fails and Tenderledge is unable to recoup any of its original investment.

1. If Tenderledge's fee agreement as general partner (GP) specifies a $20 \%$ performance fee of aggregate profits (p) with a clawback provision, which performance fees will Tenderledge accrue and what will it ultimately receive?

## Solution:

Gain in the Arguston investment: $\$ 22$ million $-\$ 10$ million $=\$ 12$ million.
Loss in the Heartfield Digital investment: $\$ 0-\$ 10$ million $=-\$ 10$ million.
Aggregate gain of Tenderledge after two years $=\$ 12$ million $-\$ 10$ million $=\$ 2$ million.

Tenderledge would initially accrue $20 \%$ of the $\$ 12$ million aggregate profit from the sale of Arguston at the end of the first year, or $\$ 12$ million $\times 20 \%$ $=\$ 2.4$ million. This amount is typically held in escrow for the benefit of the GP but not paid.
The failure of Heartfield Digital in Year 2 reduces the original $\$ 12$ million gain by $\$ 10$ million, so the aggregate fund gain at the end of Year 2 is only $\$ 2$ million. This net profit results in a performance fee of $\$ 400,000$ ( $=\$ 2$ million $\times 20 \%)$. Tenderledge would then have to return $\$ 2$ million of the previously accrued performance fees to LP investor capital accounts due to the clawback provision.

## KNOWLEDGE CHECK FEE AND RETURN CALCULATIONS

AWJ Capital is a hedge fund with $\$ 100$ million of initial investment capital. It charges a $2 \%$ management fee based on year-end AUM and a $20 \%$ incentive fee. In its first year, AWJ Capital has a $30 \%$ return. Assume management fees are calculated using end-of-period valuation.

1. What are the fees earned by AWJ if the incentive and management fees are calculated independently? What is an investor's effective return given this fee structure?

## Solution:

AWJ fees:
$\$ 130$ million $\times 2 \%=\$ 2.6$ million management fee .
$(\$ 130$ million $-\$ 100$ million $) \times 20 \%=\$ 6$ million incentive fee.
Total fees to AWJ Capital $=\$ 8.6$ million.
2. What are the fees earned by AWJ assuming that the incentive fee is calculated from the return net of the management fee? What is an investor's net return given this fee structure?

## Solution:

$\$ 130$ million $\times 2 \%=\$ 2.6$ million management fee .
( $\$ 130$ million $-\$ 100$ million $-\$ 2.6$ million) $\times 20 \%$
$=\$ 5.48$ million incentive fee.

Total fees to AWJ Capital $=\$ 8.08$ million.
Investor return $=(\$ 130$ million $-\$ 100$ million $-\$ 8.08$ million $) / \$ 100$ million
$=21.92 \%$.
3. If the fee structure specifies a hurdle rate of $5 \%$ and the incentive fee is based on returns in excess of the hurdle rate, what are the fees earned by AWJ assuming the performance fee is calculated net of the management fee? What is an investor's net return given this fee structure?

## Solution:

$\$ 130$ million $\times 2 \%=\$ 2.6$ million management fee.
( $\$ 130$ million - $\$ 100$ million - $\$ 5$ million - $\$ 2.6$ million) $\times 20 \%$
$=\$ 4.48$ million incentive fee.
Total fees to AWJ Capital $=\$ 7.08$ million.
Investor return $=(\$ 130$ million $-\$ 100$ million $-\$ 7.08$ million $) / \$ 100$ million $=22.92 \%$.
4. In the second year, the fund value declines to $\$ 110$ million. The fee structure is as specified for Question 1 but also includes the use of a high-water mark (computed net of fees). What are the fees earned by AWJ in the second year? What is an investor's net return for the second year given this fee structure?

## Solution:

$\$ 110$ million $\times 2 \%=\$ 2.2$ million management fee .
No incentive fee because the fund has declined in value.
Total fees to AWJ Capital $=\$ 2.2$ million.
Investor return $=(\$ 110$ million $-\$ 2.2$ million $-\$ 121.4$ million $) / \$ 121.4$ million $=-11.20 \%$.

The beginning capital position in the second year for the investors is $\$ 130$ million - $\$ 8.6$ million $=\$ 121.4$ million. The ending capital position at the end of the second year is $\$ 110$ million - $\$ 2.2$ million $=\$ 107.8$ million.
5. In the third year, the fund value increases to $\$ 128$ million. The fee structure is as specified in Questions 1 and 4. What are the fees earned by AWJ in the third year? What is an investor's net return for the third year given this fee structure?

## Solution:

$\$ 128$ million $\times 2 \%=\$ 2.56$ million management fee.
$(\$ 128$ million $-\$ 121.4$ million $) \times 20 \%=\$ 1.32$ million incentive fee.
The $\$ 121.4$ million represents the high-water mark established at the end of Year 1.

Total fees to AWJ Capital $=\$ 3.88$ million.
Investor return $=(\$ 128$ million $-\$ 3.88$ million $-\$ 107.8$ million $) / \$ 107.8$ million $=15.14 \%$. The ending capital position at the end of Year 3 is $\$ 124.12$ million. This amount is the new high-water mark.

## Relative Alternative Investment Returns and Survivorship Bias

Investors seeking higher risk-adjusted returns with low correlation with common asset classes in alternative investments often track their performance based on relative returns. As is the case for more common asset classes, returns on individual alternative investments are usually compared to a benchmark of investments with similar features. These benchmarks may be interpreted differently or take on different characteristics in the case of alternative investments. For example, the use of a composite benchmark for private equity or real estate investments may be misleading if a specific investment is in a different life cycle phase than most of its peers. However, return comparisons between such investments of the same vintage year on an annual or "since inception" basis lead to more accurate results. That said, lockups and illiquidity may prevent an investor from reacting to underperformance by selling an investment.

Hedge fund indexes deserve greater scrutiny given changes to the universe of funds included in a benchmark over time. For example, studies suggest that over a quarter of all hedge funds fail within the first three years due to performance problems that lead to investor defections and fund closure. The exclusion of failed funds from a given benchmark is a form of selection bias that can lead investors to overly optimistic return expectations known as survivorship bias. Survivorship bias is a major problem among hedge fund indexes that include only current investment funds and exclude those funds that are no longer available. A second form of bias relates to how and when hedge fund returns are initially included in a benchmark index. For example, a fund manager may launch several hedge fund investments at once and include only the most successful funds in an index a couple of years after inception. The subsequent inclusion or "backfilling" of prior performance data on a selective basis serves to increase average reported returns in what is known as backfill bias. Because of survivorship and backfill biases, hedge fund indexes may not reflect actual average hedge fund performance but, rather, only the returns of those hedge funds that initially performed best and/or have not failed.

## EXAMPLE 7

## Comparison of Returns: Investment Directly into a Hedge Fund or through a Fund of Hedge Funds

An investor is contemplating investing $€ 100$ million in either the ABC Hedge Fund (ABC HF) or the XYZ Fund of Funds (XYZ FOF). XYZ FOF has a "1 and 10" fee structure and invests 10\% of its AUM in ABC HF. ABC HF has a standard " 2 and 20 " fee structure with no hurdle rate. Management fees are calculated on an annual basis on AUM at the beginning of the year. For simplicity, assume that management fees and incentive fees are calculated independently. ABC HF has a $20 \%$ return for the year before management and incentive fees.

1. Calculate the return to the investor from investing directly in ABC HF .

## Solution:

ABC HF has a profit before fees on a $€ 100$ million investment of $€ 20$ million ( $=€ 100$ million $\times 20 \%$ ). The management fee is $€ 2$ million ( $=€ 100$ million $\times$ $2 \%$ ), and the incentive fee is $€ 4$ million ( $=€ 20$ million $\times 20 \%$ ). The return to the investor is $14 \%[=(20-2-4) / 100]$.
2. Calculate the return to the investor from investing in XYZ FOF. Assume that the other investments in the XYZ FOF portfolio generate the same


[^0]:    $R_{G P(\text { High-Water Mark })}$
    $=\$ 128$ million $\times 1 \%+\max [0,(\$ 128$ million $-\$ 122.7$ million $) \times 20 \%]$
    $=\$ 2.34$ million .
    $r_{i}=(\$ 128$ million $-\$ 108.9$ million $-\$ 2.34$ million $) / \$ 108.9$ million

